Artificial intelligence (AI) is the capability of computational systems to perform tasks typically associated with human intelligence, such as learning, reasoning, problem-solving, perception, and decision-making. It is a field of research in engineering, mathematics, and computer science that develops and studies methods and software that enable machines to perceive their environment and use learning and intelligence to take actions that maximise their chances of achieving defined goals.
High-profile applications of AI include advanced web search engines, chatbots, virtual assistants, autonomous vehicles, play and analysis in strategy games (e.g., chess and Go), and content generation (e.g., text, images, audio, and videos).
The traditional goals of AI research include learning, reasoning, knowledge representation, planning, natural language processing, and perception, as well as support for robotics.[a] To reach these goals, AI researchers use techniques including state space search and mathematical optimisation, formal logic, artificial neural networks, and methods based on statistics, operations research, and economics.[b] AI also draws upon psychology, linguistics, philosophy, neuroscience, and other fields. Some companies, such as OpenAI, Google DeepMind, and Meta, aim to create artificial general intelligence (AGI)—AI that can complete nearly any cognitive task at least as well as a human.
Artificial intelligence was founded as an academic discipline in 1956. The field went through multiple cycles of optimism throughout its history, followed by periods of disappointment and loss of funding, known as AI winters. Funding and interest increased substantially after 2012, when graphics processing units (GPUs) started being used to accelerate neural networks, and deep learning outperformed previous AI techniques. This growth accelerated further after 2017 with the transformer architecture. In the 2020s, an AI boom coincided with advances in generative AI, which became widespread and allowed for the creation and modification of media. In addition to AI safety and unintended consequences and harms from the use of AI, ethical concerns, AI's long-term effects, environmental effects, and potential existential risks have prompted discussions of AI regulation.
The general problem of simulating (or creating) intelligence has been broken down into subproblems. These consist of specific traits or capabilities that researchers expect an intelligent system to display. The traits described below have received the most attention and cover the scope of AI research.[a]
Early researchers developed algorithms that imitated step-by-step reasoning that humans use when solving puzzles or making logical deductions. By the late 1980s and 1990s, methods were developed for dealing with uncertain or incomplete information, employing concepts from probability and economics.
Many of these algorithms were insufficient for solving large reasoning problems because they experienced a "combinatorial explosion", meaning they become exponentially slower as the problems grow. Even humans rarely use the step-by-step deduction that early AI research could model. Humans solve most of their problems using fast, intuitive judgments.
Reasoning models, a type of large language model (LLM) trained to generate intermediate chains of thought, emerged in 2024 and allowed improved performance on complex problems in mathematics and coding. These models can produce incorrect outputs or "hallucinations," unlike symbolic reasoning systems.
AI programs use knowledge to answer questions intelligently and make deductions about real-world facts.
Formal knowledge representation and knowledge engineering use symbols to represent words, concepts and things in the world.[c] A knowledge base is a body of knowledge represented in a form that can be used by a program. An ontology is the set of objects, relations, concepts, and properties used by a particular domain of knowledge. Formal knowledge has been studied extensively since the 1970s and researchers have developed formalisms for a wide variety of difficult domains.[d]
The symbolic approach has difficulty with several problems: the breadth of commonsense knowledge (the set of atomic facts the average person knows is enormous), the sub-symbolic form of most commonsense knowledge (much of what people know is not represented as "facts" or "statements" they can express verbally), and knowledge acquisition (the problem of obtaining knowledge for AI applications).[e]
Large language models (and some other AI programs developed since 2012) do not require explicit, symbolic knowledge. They acquire knowledge by being trained on the combined text of millions of books and billions of websites. Modern AI can also learn about a domain by running experiments (as when AlphaZero learns game strategy by playing against itself). Machine learning solves the problems of general knowledge, commonsense knowledge and knowledge acquisition, however, this approach has struggled with accurate recall and valid reasoning.
An "agent" is any entity (artificial or not) that perceives and takes actions in the world. A rational agent has goals or preferences and takes actions to make them happen.[f] In automated planning, the agent has a specific goal. In automated decision-making, the agent has preferences—there are some situations it would prefer to be in, and some situations it is trying to avoid. The decision-making agent assigns a number to each situation (called its "utility") that measures how much the agent prefers it. For each possible action, it can calculate the "expected utility": the utility of all possible outcomes of the action, weighted by the probability that the outcome will occur. It can then choose the action with the maximum expected utility.
In classical planning, the agent knows exactly what the effect of any action will be. In most real-world problems, however, the agent may not  understand its current situation with certainty (it is "unknown" or "unobservable") and it may not know for certain what will happen after each possible action (it is not "deterministic"). It must choose an action by making a probabilistic guess and then reassess the situation to see if the action had the desired effect.
Alongside thorough testing and improvement based on previous decisions, having an explanation for why the agent took certain decisions is a way to build trust, especially when the decisions have to be relied upon.
In some problems, the agent's preferences may be uncertain, especially if there are other agents or humans involved. These preferences may be learned (e.g., with inverse reinforcement learning), or the agent can seek information to improve them. Information value theory can be used to weigh the value of exploratory or experimental actions. The space of possible future actions and situations is typically intractably large, so the agents must take actions and evaluate situations while being uncertain of the outcome.
A Markov decision process has a transition model that describes the probability that a particular action will change the state in a particular way and a reward function that supplies the utility of each state and the cost of each action. A policy associates a decision with each possible state. The policy could be calculated (e.g., by policy iteration), determined by a heuristic, or learned.
Game theory describes the rational behaviour of multiple interacting agents and is used in AI programs that make decisions involving other agents.
Machine learning is the study of programs that can improve their performance on a given task automatically. It has been a part of AI from the beginning.[g]
There are several kinds of machine learning: 
Computational learning theory can assess learners by computational complexity, sample complexity (how much data is required), or other notions of optimisation.
Natural language processing (NLP) allows programs to read, write, and communicate in human languages. Specific problems include speech recognition, speech synthesis, machine translation, information extraction, information retrieval, and question answering.
Early work, based on Noam Chomsky's generative grammar and semantic networks, had difficulty with word-sense disambiguation[h] unless restricted to small domains called "micro-worlds" (due to the common sense knowledge problem). British linguist and philosopher Margaret Masterman believed it was meaning and not grammar that was the key to understanding languages, and that dictionaries and especially thesauri should be the basis of computational language structure.
Modern deep learning techniques for NLP include word embedding (representing words, typically as vectors encoding their meaning), transformers (a deep learning architecture using an attention mechanism), and others. In 2019, generative pre-trained transformer (or "GPT") language models began to generate coherent text. By 2023, these models were able to get human-level scores on the bar exam, SAT (Scholastic Assessment Test), GRE (Graduate Record Examination), and many other real-world applications.
Machine perception is the ability to use input from sensors (such as cameras, microphones, wireless signals, active lidar, sonar, radar, and tactile sensors) to deduce aspects of the world. Computer vision is the ability to analyse visual input.
The field includes speech recognition, image classification, facial recognition, object recognition, object tracking, and robotic perception.
Affective computing is a field that comprises systems that recognise, interpret, process, or simulate human affect (feeling, emotion, and mood). For example, some virtual assistants are programmed to speak conversationally or even banter humorously; it makes them appear more sensitive to the emotional dynamics of human interaction, or to otherwise facilitate human–computer interaction.
However, this tends to give naïve users an unrealistic conception of the intelligence of existing computer agents. Moderate successes related to affective computing include textual sentiment analysis and, more recently, multimodal sentiment analysis, wherein AI classifies the effects displayed by a videotaped subject.
A machine with artificial general intelligence (AGI) would be able to solve a wide variety of problems with breadth and versatility similar to human intelligence.
AI research uses a wide variety of techniques to accomplish the goals above.[b]
There are two different kinds of search used in AI: state space search and local search:
State space search searches through a tree of possible states to try to find a goal state. For example, planning algorithms search through trees of goals and subgoals, attempting to find a path to a target goal, a process called means-ends analysis.
Simple exhaustive searches are rarely sufficient for most real-world problems: the search space (the number of places to search) quickly grows to astronomical numbers. The result is a search that is too slow or never completes. "Heuristics" or "rules of thumb" can help prioritise choices that are more likely to reach a goal.
Adversarial search is used for game-playing programs, such as chess or Go. It searches through a tree of possible moves and countermoves, looking for a winning position.
Local search uses mathematical optimisation to find a solution to a problem. It begins with some form of guess and refines it incrementally.
Gradient descent is a type of local search that optimises a set of numerical parameters by incrementally adjusting them to minimise a loss function. Variants of gradient descent are commonly used to train neural networks, through the backpropagation algorithm.
Another type of local search is evolutionary computation, which aims to iteratively improve a set of candidate solutions by "mutating" and "recombining" them, selecting only the fittest to survive each generation.
Distributed search processes can coordinate via swarm intelligence algorithms. Two popular swarm algorithms used in search are particle swarm optimisation (inspired by bird flocking) and ant colony optimisation (inspired by ant trails).
Formal logic is used for reasoning and knowledge representation.
Formal logic comes in two main forms: propositional logic (which operates on statements that are true or false and uses logical connectives such as "and", "or", "not" and "implies") and predicate logic (which also operates on objects, predicates and relations and uses quantifiers such as "Every X is a Y" and "There are some Xs that are Ys").
Deductive reasoning in logic is the process of proving a new statement (conclusion) from other statements that are given and assumed to be true (the premises). Proofs can be structured as proof trees, in which nodes are labelled by sentences, and children nodes are connected to parent nodes by inference rules.
Given a problem and a set of premises, problem-solving reduces to searching for a proof tree whose root node is labelled by a solution of the problem and whose leaf nodes are labelled by premises or axioms. In the case of Horn clauses, problem-solving search can be performed by reasoning forwards from the premises or backwards from the problem. In the more general case of the clausal form of first-order logic, resolution is a single, axiom-free rule of inference, in which a problem is solved by proving a contradiction from premises that include the negation of the problem to be solved.
Inference in both Horn clause logic and first-order logic is undecidable, and therefore intractable. However, backward reasoning with Horn clauses, which underpins computation in the logic programming language Prolog, is Turing complete. Moreover, its efficiency is competitive with computation in other symbolic programming languages.
Fuzzy logic assigns a "degree of truth" between 0 and 1. It can therefore handle propositions that are vague and partially true.
Non-monotonic logics, including logic programming with negation as failure, are designed to handle default reasoning. Other specialised versions of logic have been developed to describe many complex domains.
Many problems in AI (including reasoning, planning, learning, perception, and robotics) require the agent to operate with incomplete or uncertain information. AI researchers have devised a number of tools to solve these problems using methods from probability theory and economics. Precise mathematical tools have been developed that analyse how an agent can make choices and plan, using decision theory, decision analysis, and information value theory. These tools include models such as Markov decision processes, dynamic decision networks, game theory and mechanism design.
Bayesian networks are a tool that can be used for reasoning (using the Bayesian inference algorithm),[i] learning (using the expectation–maximisation algorithm),[j] planning (using decision networks) and perception (using dynamic Bayesian networks).
Probabilistic algorithms can also be used for filtering, prediction, smoothing, and finding explanations for streams of data, thus helping perception systems analyse processes that occur over time (e.g., hidden Markov models or Kalman filters).
The simplest AI applications can be divided into two types: classifiers (e.g., "if shiny then diamond"), on one hand, and controllers (e.g., "if diamond then pick up"), on the other hand. Classifiers are functions that use pattern matching to determine the closest match. They can be fine-tuned based on chosen examples using supervised learning. Each pattern (also called an "observation") is labeled with a certain predefined class. All the observations combined with their class labels are known as a data set. When a new observation is received, that observation is classified based on previous experience.
There are many kinds of classifiers in use. The decision tree is the simplest and most widely used symbolic machine learning algorithm. K-nearest neighbour algorithm was the most widely used analogical AI until the mid-1990s, and Kernel methods such as the support vector machine (SVM) displaced k-nearest neighbour in the 1990s.
The naive Bayes classifier is reportedly the "most widely used learner" at Google, due in part to its scalability.
Neural networks are also used as classifiers.
An artificial neural network is based on a collection of nodes also known as artificial neurons, which loosely model the neurons in a biological brain. It is trained to recognise patterns; once trained, it can recognise those patterns in fresh data. There is an input, at least one hidden layer of nodes and an output. Each node applies a function and once the weight crosses its specified threshold, the data is transmitted to the next layer. A network is typically called a deep neural network if it has at least 2 hidden layers.
Learning algorithms for neural networks use local search to choose the weights that will get the right output for each input during training. The most common training technique is the backpropagation algorithm. Neural networks learn to model complex relationships between inputs and outputs and find patterns in data. In theory, a neural network can learn any function.
In feedforward neural networks the signal passes in only one direction. The term perceptron typically refers to a single-layer neural network. In contrast, deep learning uses many layers. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) feed the output signal back into the input, which allows short-term memories of previous input events. Long short-term memory networks (LSTMs) are recurrent neural networks that better preserve longterm dependencies and are less sensitive to the vanishing gradient problem. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) use layers of kernels to more efficiently process local patterns. This local processing is especially important in image processing, where the early CNN layers typically identify simple local patterns such as edges and curves, with subsequent layers detecting more complex patterns like textures, and eventually whole objects.
Deep learning uses several layers of neurons between the network's inputs and outputs. The multiple layers can progressively extract higher-level features from the raw input. For example, in image processing, lower layers may identify edges, while higher layers may identify the concepts relevant to a human such as digits, letters, or faces.
Deep learning has been used to improve the performance of programs in subfields of artificial intelligence including computer vision, speech recognition, natural language processing, image classification and others.[citation needed]
Deep neural networks and backpropagation had been in development since 1950.[k]
Starting in 2012, the speed of deep learning was increased one hundred-fold by switching to GPUs, and there were enormous amounts of data available on the internet (called at the time "big data") as well as curated datasets used for benchmark testing, such as ImageNet. Usage of deep learning increased in 2012–2015 due to these improvements. In 2025, Geoffrey Hinton said that, until the 2010s, "We couldn't do anything very impressive because we didn’t have enough data and we didn't have enough computation."
Generative pre-trained transformers (GPTs) are large language models (LLMs) that generate text based on the semantic relationships between words in sentences. Text-based GPT models are pre-trained on a large corpus of text that can be from the Internet. The pretraining consists of predicting the next token (a token being usually a word, subword, or punctuation). Throughout this pretraining, GPT models accumulate knowledge about the world and can then generate human-like text by repeatedly predicting the next token. Typically, a subsequent training phase makes the model more truthful, useful, and harmless, usually with a technique called reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). Current GPT models are prone to generating falsehoods called "hallucinations". These can be reduced with RLHF and quality data, but the problem has been getting worse for reasoning systems. Such systems are used in chatbots, which allow people to ask a question or request a task in simple text.
Current models and services include ChatGPT, Claude, Gemini, Copilot, and Meta AI. Multimodal GPT models can process different types of data (modalities) such as images, videos, sound, and text.
In the late 2010s, graphics processing units (GPUs) that were increasingly designed with AI-specific enhancements and used with specialised TensorFlow software had replaced previously used central processing unit (CPUs) as the dominant means for large-scale (commercial and academic) machine learning models' training. Specialised programming languages such as Prolog were used in early AI research, but general-purpose programming languages like Python have become predominant.
The transistor density in integrated circuits has been observed to roughly double every 18 months—a trend known as Moore's law, named after the Intel co-founder Gordon Moore, who first identified it. Improvements in GPUs have been even faster, a trend sometimes called Huang's law, named after Nvidia co-founder and CEO Jensen Huang.
AI and machine learning technology is used in most of the essential applications of the 2020s, including:
AlphaFold 2 (2021) demonstrated the ability to approximate, in hours rather than months, the 3D structure of a protein. In 2023, it was reported that AI-guided drug discovery helped find a class of antibiotics capable of killing two different types of drug-resistant bacteria. In 2024, researchers used machine learning to accelerate the search for Parkinson's disease drug treatments. Their aim was to identify compounds that block the clumping, or aggregation, of alpha-synuclein (the protein that characterises Parkinson's disease). They were able to speed up the initial screening process ten-fold and reduce the cost by a thousand-fold.
A 2026 Nature article titled "Dozens of AI disease-prediction models were trained on dubious data" highlighted the use of unreliable data being used to train AI medical prediction models for stroke and diabetes in 125 research articles. Evidence suggested some of the AI tools that were developed on unreliable data had been used on patients, although it was not clear if there were adverse outcomes.
Game playing programs have been used since the 1950s to demonstrate and test AI's most advanced techniques. Deep Blue became the first computer chess-playing system to beat a reigning world chess champion, Garry Kasparov, on 11 May 1997. In 2011, in a Jeopardy! quiz show exhibition match, IBM's question answering system, Watson, defeated the two greatest Jeopardy! champions, Brad Rutter and Ken Jennings, by a significant margin. In March 2016, AlphaGo won 4 out of 5 games of Go in a match with Go champion Lee Sedol, becoming the first computer Go-playing system to beat a professional Go player without handicaps. Then, in 2017, it defeated Ke Jie, who was the best Go player in the world. Other programs handle imperfect-information games, such as the poker-playing program Pluribus. DeepMind developed increasingly generalistic reinforcement learning models, such as with MuZero, which could be trained to play chess, Go, or Atari games. In 2019, DeepMind's AlphaStar achieved grandmaster level in StarCraft II, a particularly challenging real-time strategy game that involves incomplete knowledge of what happens on the map. In 2021, an AI agent competed in a PlayStation Gran Turismo competition, winning against four of the world's best Gran Turismo drivers using deep reinforcement learning. In 2024, Google DeepMind introduced SIMA, a type of AI capable of autonomously playing nine previously unseen open-world video games by observing screen output, as well as executing short, specific tasks in response to natural language instructions.
In January 2025, Microsoft proposed the technique rStar-Math that leverages Monte Carlo tree search and step-by-step reasoning, enabling a relatively small language model like Qwen-7B to solve 53% of the AIME 2024 and 90% of the MATH benchmark problems. Google DeepMind has developed models for solving mathematical problems: AlphaDev, AlphaEvolve, AlphaGeometry, AlphaProof, AlphaTensor, and FunSearch.
When natural language is used to describe mathematical problems, converters can transform such prompts into a formal language such as Lean to define mathematical tasks. The experimental model Gemini Deep Think accepts natural language prompts directly and achieved gold medal results in the International Math Olympiad of 2025.
In June 2026, an international group of mathematicians published a statement calling on mathematicians, professional organizations, and policymakers to disclose the use of AI, uphold peer review, and protect the openness and values of the discipline.
In September 2026, OpenAI announced that one of their models had produced a counter-example to the Navier–Stokes existence and smoothness problem, a Millennium Prize Problem in mathematics. As of 2026, the claim has not been verified by any external mathematicians and is the subject of a priority dispute.
According to Nicolas Firzli, director of the World Pensions & Investments Forum, it may be too early to see the emergence of highly innovative AI-informed financial products and services. He argues that "the deployment of AI tools will simply further automatise things: destroying tens of thousands of jobs in banking, financial planning, and pension advice in the process, but I'm not sure it will unleash a new wave of [e.g., sophisticated] pension innovation."
Military AI usage attempts to enhance command and control, communications, sensors, integration and interoperability. Intelligence collection and analysis, logistics, cyber operations, information operations, and semiautonomous and autonomous vehicles are being researched. AI technologies are used in coordination of sensors and effectors, threat detection and identification, marking of enemy positions, target acquisition, coordination and deconfliction of distributed Joint Fires between networked combat vehicles, both human-operated and autonomous.
AI has been used in military operations in Iraq, Syria, Israel and Ukraine.
Generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) is a subfield of artificial intelligence (AI) that uses generative models to generate text, images, videos, audio, computer code or other forms of digital data. These models learn the underlying patterns and structures of their training data, and use them to generate new data in response to input, which often takes the form of natural language prompts.
The prevalence of generative AI tools has increased significantly since the AI boom of the early 2020s. This boom was made possible by improvements in deep neural networks, particularly large language models (LLMs), which are based on the transformer architecture. Generative AI applications include chatbots such as ChatGPT, Claude, Microsoft Copilot, DeepSeek, Doubao, Google Gemini, Grok, Kimi and Qwen; text-to-image models such as DALL-E, Firefly, Stable Diffusion, and Midjourney; and text-to-video models such as Veo, LTX and Sora.
Companies in a variety of sectors have used or proposed the use of generative AI, including those in software development, healthcare, finance, entertainment, sales and marketing, screenwriting, and product design.
AI agents are software entities designed to perceive their environment, make decisions, and take actions autonomously to achieve specific goals. These agents can interact with users, their environment, or other agents. AI agents are used in various applications, including virtual assistants, chatbots, autonomous vehicles, game-playing systems, and industrial robotics. AI agents operate within the constraints of their programming, available computational resources, and hardware limitations. This means they are restricted to performing tasks within their defined scope and have finite memory and processing capabilities. In real-world applications, AI agents often face time constraints for decision-making and action execution. Many AI agents incorporate learning algorithms, enabling them to improve their performance over time through experience or training. Using machine learning, AI agents can adapt to new situations and optimise their behaviour for their designated tasks.
Microsoft introduced Copilot Search in February 2023 under the name Bing Chat. Copilot Search provides AI-generated summaries.
Generative AI features added to Google Search include AI Overviews in May 2024 and AI Mode in May 2025.
Applications of AI in this domain include AI-enabled menstruation and fertility trackers that analyse user data to offer predictions, AI-integrated sex toys (e.g., teledildonics), AI-generated sexual education content, and AI agents that simulate sexual and romantic partners (e.g., Replika). AI is also used for the production of non-consensual deepfake pornography, raising significant ethical and legal concerns.
AI technologies have also been used to attempt to identify online gender-based violence and online sexual grooming of minors.
In a 2017 survey, one in five companies reported having incorporated "AI" in some offerings or processes.
In the field of evacuation and disaster management, AI has been used to investigate patterns in large-scale and small-scale evacuations using historical data from GPS, videos or social media.
During the 2024 Indian elections, US$50 million was spent on authorised AI-generated content, notably by creating deepfakes of allied (including sometimes deceased) politicians to better engage with voters, and by translating speeches to various local languages.
The use of generative AI by law firms for legal research resulted in the creation of the global "AI Hallucination Cases" database, in April 2025, established by HEC Paris and Sciences Po legal data analysis lecturer Damien Charlotin. By 2026, judges had issued sanctions and bar associations had issued warnings due to attorney submissions to the courts containing fabricated case law citations hallucinated by AI tools.
AI has potential benefits and potential risks. AI may be able to advance science and find solutions for serious problems: Demis Hassabis of DeepMind hopes to "solve intelligence, and then use that to solve everything else". However, as the use of AI has become widespread, several unintended consequences and risks have been identified. In-production systems can sometimes not factor ethics and bias into their AI training processes, especially when the AI algorithms are inherently unexplainable in deep learning.
Machine learning algorithms require large amounts of data. The techniques used to acquire this data have raised concerns about privacy, surveillance and copyright.
AI-powered devices and services, such as virtual assistants and IoT products, continuously collect personal information, raising concerns about intrusive data gathering and unauthorised access by third parties. The loss of privacy is further exacerbated by AI's ability to process and combine vast amounts of data, potentially leading to a surveillance society where individual activities are constantly monitored and analysed without adequate safeguards or transparency.
Sensitive user data collected may include online activity records, geolocation data, video, or audio. For example, in order to build speech recognition algorithms, Amazon has recorded millions of private conversations and allowed temporary workers to listen to and transcribe some of them. Opinions about this widespread surveillance range from those who see it as a necessary evil to those for whom it is clearly unethical and a violation of the right to privacy.
AI developers argue that this is the only way to deliver valuable applications and have developed several techniques that attempt to preserve privacy while still obtaining the data, such as data aggregation, de-identification and differential privacy. Since 2016, some privacy experts, such as Cynthia Dwork, have begun to view privacy in terms of fairness. Brian Christian wrote that experts have pivoted "from the question of 'what they know' to the question of 'what they're doing with it'."
Generative AI is often trained on unlicensed copyrighted works, including in domains such as images or computer code; the output is then used under the rationale of "fair use". Experts disagree about how well and under what circumstances this rationale will hold up in courts of law; relevant factors may include "the purpose and character of the use of the copyrighted work" and "the effect upon the potential market for the copyrighted work". Website owners can indicate that they do not want their content scraped via a "robots.txt" file. However, some companies will scrape content regardless because the robots.txt file has no real authority. In 2023, leading authors (including John Grisham and Jonathan Franzen) sued AI companies for using their work to train generative AI. Another discussed approach is to envision a separate sui generis system of protection for creations generated by AI to ensure fair attribution and compensation for human authors.
The commercial AI scene is dominated by Big Tech companies such as Alphabet Inc., Amazon, Apple Inc., Meta Platforms, and Microsoft. Some of these companies already own the vast majority of existing cloud infrastructure and computing power from data centres, allowing them to entrench further in the marketplace. For most of 2025-2026, AI-related companies have also dominated stock market returns. According to a July 2024 report from S&P Global, investors had started questioning whether the enormous spending on AI infrastructure and data centers would generate sufficient profits, leading to increased volatility in technology and semiconductor stocks and to concerns about a potential AI bubble. In a 2025 Economic Policy article, economists Anton Korinek and Jai Vipra described some AI related market sectors as highly concentrated.
Technology companies have built electricity and artificial intelligence infrastructure to facilitate the AI boom of the 2020s. A 2025 report from the consulting firm McKinsey & Company estimated that by 2030, $2.7 trillion would be invested into AI infrastructure and data centres in the US, surpassing World War II's Manhattan Project every month.
In January 2024, the International Energy Agency (IEA) released Electricity 2024, Analysis and Forecast to 2026. This is the first IEA report to make projections for data centres and power consumption by AI and cryptocurrency. The report states that power demand for these uses might double by 2026, with the additional power consumption equaling that of Japan.
Power consumption by AI is responsible for an increase in fossil fuel use, and has delayed closings of obsolete, carbon-emitting coal energy facilities. A ChatGPT search involves 10 times as much electrical energy as a Google search.
A 2024 Goldman Sachs research paper, AI Data Centers and the Coming US Power Demand Surge, found "US power demand (is) likely to experience growth not seen in a generation...." and forecasts that, by 2030, US data centres will consume 8% of US power, as opposed to 3% in 2022, presaging growth for the electrical power generation industry by a variety of means. Data centres' need for more and more electrical power is such that they might max out the electrical grid. The Big Tech companies counter that AI can be used to maximise the utilisation of the grid by all.
In 2024, The Wall Street Journal reported that big AI companies have begun negotiations with the US nuclear power providers to provide electricity to the data centres. In March 2024, Amazon purchased a Pennsylvania nuclear-powered data centre for US$650 million.
In September 2024, Microsoft announced an agreement with Constellation Energy to re-open the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant to provide Microsoft with 100% of all electric power produced by the plant for 20 years. Reopening the plant, which suffered a partial nuclear meltdown of its Unit 2 reactor in 1979, will require Constellation to get through strict regulatory processes which will include extensive safety scrutiny from the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission. If approved (this will be the first ever US re-commissioning of a nuclear plant), over 835 megawatts of power – enough for 800,000 homes – will be produced. The cost for re-opening and upgrading is estimated at US$1.6 billion and is dependent on tax breaks for nuclear power contained in the 2022 US Inflation Reduction Act. As of 2024, the US government and the state of Michigan have been investing almost US$2 billion to reopen the Palisades nuclear reactor on Lake Michigan. Closed since 2022, the plant was scheduled to be reopened in October 2025.
After the last approval in September 2023, Taiwan suspended the approval of data centres north of Taoyuan with a capacity of more than 5 MW in 2024, due to power supply shortages. Taiwan aims to phase out nuclear power by 2025.
Singapore imposed a ban on the opening of data centres in 2019 due to electric power, but lifted it in 2022.
Although most nuclear plants in Japan have been shut down after the 2011 Fukushima nuclear accident, according to an October 2024 Bloomberg article in Japanese, cloud gaming services company Ubitus, in which Nvidia has a stake, is looking for land in Japan near a nuclear power plant for a new data centre for generative AI.
On 1 November 2024, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) rejected an application submitted by Talen Energy for approval to supply some electricity from the nuclear power station Susquehanna to Amazon's data centre.
According to the Commission Chairman Willie L. Phillips, it is a burden on the electricity grid as well as a significant cost-shifting concern to households and other business sectors.
In 2025, a report prepared by the IEA estimated the greenhouse gas emissions from the energy consumption of AI at 180 million tons. By 2035, these emissions could rise to 300–500 million tonnes depending on what measures will be taken. This is below 1.5% of the energy sector emissions. The emissions reduction potential of AI was estimated at 5% of the energy sector emissions, but rebound effects (for example if people switch from public transport to autonomous cars) can reduce it.
In June 2026, the United Nations University Institute for Water, Environment and Health released a report about cumulative environmental impacts of AI, not only carbon. The report found that AI has significant negative impacts on land, water, and climate, as it uses large amounts of electricity, requires mining of minerals, and generates large amounts of electronic waste. In 2025, data centres consumed more electricity than Saudi Arabia, and ChatGPT alone consumed an amount of water equivalent to the needs of 500,000 people in Sub-Saharan Africa. The negative impacts are not distributed equally across the planet but are concentrated in some places. Data centres are often built in places already suffering from water deficit. For example, AI deployment has already led to an increase in water scarcity in Mexico and Uruguay. It created problems with energy supply in Ireland, which forbade construction of new data centres near Dublin until 2028. Measures can involve tradeoffs, for example, transitioning from coal to bioenergy reduces carbon footprint but increases the impact on land and water. Energy efficiency might not reduce environmental impact, because as AI becomes more efficient, it also becomes cheaper and more widely used.
YouTube, Facebook and others use recommender systems to guide users to more content. These AI programs were given the goal of maximising user engagement (that is, the only goal was to keep people watching). The AI learned that users tended to choose misinformation, conspiracy theories, and extreme partisan content, and, to keep them watching, the AI recommended more of it. Users also tended to watch more content on the same subject, so the AI led people into filter bubbles where they received multiple versions of the same misinformation. This convinced many users that the misinformation was true, and ultimately undermined trust in institutions, the media and the government. The AI program had correctly learned to maximise its goal, but the result was harmful to society. After the U.S. election in 2016, major technology companies took some steps to mitigate the problem.
In the early 2020s, generative AI began to create images, audio, and texts that are virtually indistinguishable from real photographs, recordings, or human writing, while realistic AI-generated videos became feasible in the mid-2020s. It is possible for bad actors to use this technology to create massive amounts of misinformation and computational propaganda through techniques such as deepfakes. AI pioneer and Nobel Prize-winning computer scientist Geoffrey Hinton expressed concern about AI enabling "authoritarian leaders to manipulate their electorates" on a large scale, among other risks. The ability to influence electorates has been proved in at least one study. This same study shows more inaccurate statements from the models when they advocate for candidates of the political right.
AI researchers at Microsoft, OpenAI, universities and other organisations have suggested using "personhood credentials" as a way to overcome online deception enabled by AI models.
Machine learning applications can be biased[l] if they learn from biased data. The developers may not be aware that the bias exists. Discriminatory behaviour by some LLMs can be observed in their output. Bias can be introduced by the way training data is selected and by the way a model is deployed. If a biased algorithm is used to make decisions that can seriously harm people (as it can in medicine, finance, recruitment, housing or policing) then the algorithm may cause discrimination. The field of fairness studies how to prevent harms from algorithmic biases.
On 28 June 2015, Google Photos's new image labelling feature mistakenly identified Jacky Alcine and a friend as "gorillas" because they were black. The system was trained on a dataset that contained very few images of black people, a problem called "sample size disparity". Google "fixed" this problem by preventing the system from labelling anything as a "gorilla". Eight years later, in 2023, Google Photos still could not identify a gorilla, and neither could similar products from Apple, Facebook, Microsoft and Amazon.
COMPAS is a commercial program widely used by U.S. courts to assess the likelihood of a defendant becoming a recidivist. In 2016, Julia Angwin at ProPublica discovered that COMPAS exhibited racial bias, despite the fact that the program was not told the races of the defendants. Although the error rate for both whites and blacks was calibrated equal at exactly 61%, the errors for each race were different—the system consistently overestimated the chance that a black person would re-offend and would underestimate the chance that a white person would not re-offend. In 2017, several researchers[m] showed that it was mathematically impossible for COMPAS to accommodate all possible measures of fairness when the base rates of re-offence were different for whites and blacks in the data.
A program can make biased decisions even if the data does not explicitly mention a problematic feature (such as "race" or "gender"). The feature will correlate with other features (like "address", "shopping history" or "first name"), and the program will make the same decisions based on these features as it would on "race" or "gender". Moritz Hardt said "the most robust fact in this research area is that fairness through blindness doesn't work."
Criticism of COMPAS highlighted that machine learning models are designed to make "predictions" that are only valid if we assume that the future will resemble the past. If they are trained on data that includes the results of racist decisions in the past, machine learning models must predict that racist decisions will be made in the future. If an application then uses these predictions as recommendations, some of these "recommendations" will likely be racist. Thus, machine learning is not well suited to help make decisions in areas where there is hope that the future will be better than the past. It is descriptive rather than prescriptive.[n]
Bias and unfairness may go undetected because the developers are overwhelmingly white and male: among AI engineers, about 4% are black and 20% are women.
There are various conflicting definitions and mathematical models of fairness. These notions depend on ethical assumptions, and are influenced by beliefs about society. One broad category is distributive fairness, which focuses on the outcomes, often identifying groups and seeking to compensate for statistical disparities. Representational fairness tries to ensure that AI systems do not reinforce negative stereotypes or render certain groups invisible. Procedural fairness focuses on the decision process rather than the outcome. The most relevant notions of fairness may depend on the context, notably the type of AI application and the stakeholders. The subjectivity in the notions of bias and fairness makes it difficult for companies to operationalise them. Having access to sensitive attributes such as race or gender is also considered by many AI ethicists to be necessary in order to compensate for biases, but it may conflict with anti-discrimination laws.
At the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency a paper reported that a CLIP‑based (Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training) robotic system reproduced harmful gender‑ and race‑linked stereotypes in a simulated manipulation task. The authors recommended robot‑learning methods which physically manifest such harms be "paused, reworked, or even wound down when appropriate, until outcomes can be proven safe, effective, and just."
Many AI systems are so complex that their designers cannot explain how they reach their decisions. Particularly with deep neural networks, in which there are many non-linear relationships between inputs and outputs. But some popular explainability techniques exist.
It is impossible to be certain that a program is operating correctly if no one knows how exactly it works. There have been many cases where a machine learning program passed rigorous tests, but nevertheless learned something different from what the programmers intended. For example, a system that could identify skin diseases better than medical professionals was found to actually have a strong tendency to classify images with a ruler as "cancerous", because pictures of malignancies typically include a ruler to show the scale. Another machine learning system designed to help effectively allocate medical resources was found to classify patients with asthma as being at "low risk" of dying from pneumonia. Having asthma is actually a severe risk factor, but since the patients having asthma would usually get much more medical care, they were relatively unlikely to die according to the training data. The correlation between asthma and low risk of dying from pneumonia was real, but misleading.
People who have been harmed by an algorithm's decision have a right to an explanation. Doctors, for example, are expected to clearly and completely explain to their colleagues the reasoning behind any decision they make. Early drafts of the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation in 2016 included an explicit statement that this right exists.[o] Industry experts noted that this is an unsolved problem with no solution in sight. Regulators argued that nevertheless the harm is real: if the problem has no solution, the tools should not be used.
DARPA established the XAI ("Explainable Artificial Intelligence") program in 2014 to try to solve these problems.
Several approaches aim to address the transparency problem. SHAP enables to visualise the contribution of each feature to the output. LIME can locally approximate a model's outputs with a simpler, interpretable model. Multitask learning provides a large number of outputs in addition to the target classification. These other outputs can help developers deduce what the network has learned. Deconvolution, DeepDream and other generative methods can allow developers to see what different layers of a deep network for computer vision have learned, and produce output that can suggest what the network is learning. For generative pre-trained transformers, Anthropic developed a technique based on dictionary learning that associates patterns of neuron activations with human-understandable concepts.
Artificial intelligence provides a number of tools that are useful to bad actors, such as authoritarian governments, terrorists, criminals or rogue states. There are many ways in which AI is expected to help bad actors, some of which can not be foreseen. For example, machine-learning AI is able to design tens of thousands of toxic molecules in a matter of hours.
AI tools make it easier for governments to efficiently control their citizens and can increase digital authoritarianism and political repression. Face and voice recognition allow widespread surveillance. Machine learning, operating this data, can classify potential enemies of the state and prevent them from hiding. Recommendation systems can precisely target propaganda and misinformation for maximum effect. Deepfakes and generative AI aid in producing misinformation. Advanced AI can make authoritarian centralised decision-making more competitive than liberal and decentralised systems such as markets. It lowers the cost and difficulty of digital warfare and advanced spyware. AI facial recognition systems are already being used for mass surveillance in China.
Economists have frequently highlighted the risks of redundancies from AI, and speculated about unemployment if there is no adequate social policy for full employment.
The Economist said in 2015 that "the worry that AI could do to white-collar jobs what steam power did to blue-collar ones during the Industrial Revolution" is "worth taking seriously". Jobs at extreme risk range from paralegals to fast food cooks, while job demand is likely to increase for care-related professions ranging from personal healthcare to the clergy. In July 2025, Ford CEO Jim Farley predicted that "artificial intelligence is going to replace literally half of all white-collar workers in the U.S."
According to the Stanford Digital Economy Lab in 2026, early-career workers showed decreasing employment rates in some AI-exposed occupations.
In April 2023, Rest of World reported that 70% of the jobs for Chinese video game illustrators had been eliminated by generative artificial intelligence.
With the increase of loneliness in the early 21st century, AI is sometimes identified as a potential source of relief to this problem. It would be possible, via human-like qualities built into AI products, for individuals to assume that this need can be met by artificial means. In some cases, people approach artificial intelligence for companionship when they believe that they would not find acceptance due to feeling outcast. Examples of harm coming to humans from advanced chatbots have been reported in courts in the United States, with AI companies accused of creating products that endanger humans through emotional confusion or deception.
A lethal autonomous weapon is a machine that locates, selects and engages human targets without human supervision.[p] Widely available AI tools can be used by bad actors to develop inexpensive autonomous weapons and, if produced at scale, they are potentially weapons of mass destruction. Even when used in conventional warfare, they currently cannot reliably choose targets and could potentially kill an innocent person. In 2014, 30 nations (including China) supported a ban on autonomous weapons under the United Nations' Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, however the United States and others disagreed. By 2015, over fifty countries were reported to be researching battlefield robots.
Recent public debates in artificial intelligence have increasingly focused on its broader societal and ethical implications. It has been argued AI will become so powerful that humanity may irreversibly lose control of it. This could, as physicist Stephen Hawking stated, "spell the end of the human race". This scenario has been common in science fiction, when a computer or robot suddenly develops a human-like "self-awareness" (or "sentience" or "consciousness") and becomes a malevolent character.[q] These sci-fi scenarios are misleading in several ways.
First, AI does not require human-like sentience to be an existential risk. Modern AI programs are given specific goals and use learning and intelligence to achieve them. Philosopher Nick Bostrom argued that if one gives almost any goal to a sufficiently powerful AI, it may choose to destroy humanity to achieve it (he used the example of an automated paperclip factory that destroys the world to get more iron for paperclips). Stuart Russell gives the example of household robot that tries to find a way to kill its owner to prevent it from being unplugged, reasoning that "you can't fetch the coffee if you're dead." (These are examples of "instrumental convergence".) In order to be safe for humanity, a superintelligence would have to be genuinely aligned with humanity's morality and values so that it is "fundamentally on our side".
Second, Yuval Noah Harari argues that AI does not require a robot body or physical control to pose an existential risk. The essential parts of civilisation are not physical. Things like ideologies, law, government, money and the economy are built on language; they exist because there are stories that billions of people believe. The current prevalence of misinformation suggests that an AI could use language to convince people to believe anything, even to take actions that are destructive. Geoffrey Hinton said in 2025 that modern AI is particularly "good at persuasion" and getting better all the time. He asks, "Suppose you wanted to invade the capital of the US. Do you have to go there and do it yourself? No. You just have to be good at persuasion."
The opinions amongst experts and industry insiders are mixed, with sizeable fractions both concerned and unconcerned by risk from eventual superintelligent AI. Personalities such as Stephen Hawking, Bill Gates, and Elon Musk, as well as AI pioneers such as Geoffrey Hinton, Yoshua Bengio, Stuart Russell, Demis Hassabis, and Sam Altman, have expressed concerns about existential risk from AI.
In May 2023, Geoffrey Hinton announced his resignation from Google in order to be able to "freely speak out about the risks of AI" without "considering how this impacts Google". He notably mentioned risks of an AI takeover, and stressed that in order to avoid the worst outcomes, establishing safety guidelines will require cooperation among those competing in use of AI.
In 2023, many leading AI experts endorsed the joint statement that "Mitigating the risk of extinction from AI should be a global priority alongside other societal-scale risks such as pandemics and nuclear war".
Some other researchers were more optimistic. AI pioneer Jürgen Schmidhuber did not sign the joint statement, emphasising that in 95% of all cases, AI research is about making "human lives longer and healthier and easier." While the tools that are now being used to improve lives can also be used by bad actors, "they can also be used against the bad actors." Andrew Ng also argued that "it's a mistake to fall for the doomsday hype on AI—and that regulators who do will only benefit vested interests." Yann LeCun, a Turing Award winner, disagreed with the idea that AI will subordinate humans "simply because they are smarter, let alone destroy [us]", "scoff[ing] at his peers' dystopian scenarios of supercharged misinformation and even, eventually, human extinction." In contrast, he claimed that "intelligent machines will usher in a new renaissance for humanity, a new era of enlightenment." In the early 2010s, experts argued that the risks are too distant in the future to warrant research or that humans will be valuable from the perspective of a superintelligent machine. However, after 2016, the study of current and future risks and possible solutions became a serious area of research. Some have argued that concerns about existential risks of AI could draw attention away from other AI risks.
Friendly AI are machines that have been designed from the beginning to minimise risks and to make choices that benefit humans. Eliezer Yudkowsky, who coined the term, argues that developing friendly AI should be a higher research priority: it may require a large investment and it must be completed before AI becomes an existential risk.
Machines with intelligence have the potential to use their intelligence to make ethical decisions. The field of machine ethics provides machines with ethical principles and procedures for resolving ethical dilemmas.
The field of machine ethics is also called computational morality,
and was founded at an AAAI symposium in 2005.
Geoffrey Hinton has suggested researchers explore instilling human-aligned values, such as compassion, into AI systems as a safeguard, speculating about the possibility of building "maternal instincts" into AI models, so “they really care about people”.
Other approaches include Wendell Wallach's "artificial moral agents" and Stuart J. Russell's three principles for developing provably beneficial machines.
Active organisations in the AI open-source community include Hugging Face, Google, EleutherAI and Meta. Various AI models, such as Llama 2, Mistral or Stable Diffusion, have been made open-weight, meaning that their architecture and trained parameters (the "weights") are publicly available. Open-weight models can be freely fine-tuned, which allows companies to specialise them with their own data and for their own use-case. Open-weight models are useful for research and innovation but can also be misused. Since they can be fine-tuned, any built-in security measure, such as objecting to harmful requests, can be trained away until it becomes ineffective. Some researchers warn that future AI models may develop dangerous capabilities (such as the potential to drastically facilitate bioterrorism) and that once released on the Internet, they cannot be deleted everywhere if needed. They recommend pre-release audits and cost-benefit analyses.
Artificial intelligence projects can be guided by ethical considerations during the design, development, and implementation of an AI system. An AI framework such as the Care and Act Framework, developed by the Alan Turing Institute and based on the SUM values, outlines four main ethical dimensions, defined as follows:
Other developments in ethical frameworks include those decided upon during the Asilomar Conference, the Montreal Declaration for Responsible AI, and the IEEE's Ethics of Autonomous Systems initiative, among others; however, these principles are not without criticism, especially regarding the people chosen to contribute to these frameworks.
Promotion of the wellbeing of the people and communities that these technologies affect requires consideration of the social and ethical implications at all stages of AI system design, development and implementation, and collaboration between job roles such as data scientists, product managers, data engineers, domain experts, and delivery managers.
The UK AI Safety Institute released in 2024 a testing toolset called 'Inspect' for AI safety evaluations available under an MIT open-source licence which is freely available on GitHub and can be improved with third-party packages. It can be used to evaluate AI models in a range of areas including core knowledge, ability to reason, and autonomous capabilities.
The regulation of artificial intelligence is the development of public sector policies and laws for promoting and regulating AI; it is therefore related to the broader regulation of algorithms. The regulatory and policy landscape for AI is an emerging issue in jurisdictions globally. According to AI Index at Stanford, the annual number of AI-related laws passed in the 127 survey countries jumped from one passed in 2016 to 37 passed in 2022 alone. Between 2016 and 2020, more than 30 countries adopted dedicated strategies for AI. Most EU member states had released national AI strategies, as had Canada, China, India, Japan, Mauritius, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, U.S., and Vietnam. Others were in the process of elaborating their own AI strategy, including Bangladesh, Malaysia and Tunisia. The Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence was launched in June 2020, stating a need for AI to be developed in accordance with human rights and democratic values, to ensure public confidence and trust in the technology. Henry Kissinger, Eric Schmidt, and Daniel Huttenlocher published a joint statement in November 2021 calling for a government commission to regulate AI. In 2023, OpenAI leaders published recommendations for the governance of superintelligence, which they believe may happen in less than 10 years. In 2023, the United Nations also launched an advisory body to provide recommendations on AI governance; the body comprises technology company executives, government officials and academics. On 1 August 2024, the EU Artificial Intelligence Act entered into force, establishing the first comprehensive EU-wide AI regulation. In 2024, the Council of Europe created the first international legally binding treaty on AI, called the "Framework Convention on Artificial Intelligence and Human Rights, Democracy and the Rule of Law". It was adopted by the European Union, the United States, the United Kingdom, and other signatories.
In a 2022 Ipsos survey, attitudes towards AI varied greatly by country; 78% of Chinese citizens, but only 35% of Americans, agreed that "products and services using AI have more benefits than drawbacks". A 2023 Reuters/Ipsos poll found that 61% of Americans agree, and 22% disagree, that AI poses risks to humanity. In a 2023 Fox News poll, 35% of Americans thought it "very important", and an additional 41% thought it "somewhat important", for the federal government to regulate AI, versus 13% responding "not very important" and 8% responding "not at all important". A 2026 NBC News Decision Desk poll powered by SurveyMonkey found that 52% of American adults used AI tools very often or sometimes, but only 18% said they could trust AI-generated information most or almost all of the time, and 70% were more worried than excited about AI. Polls in the United States found the main public concerns were job losses, impersonation, misinformation and information privacy.
In November 2023, the first global AI Safety Summit was held in Bletchley Park in the UK to discuss the near and far term risks of AI and the possibility of mandatory and voluntary regulatory frameworks. 28 countries including the United States, China, and the European Union issued a declaration at the start of the summit, calling for international co-operation to manage the challenges and risks of artificial intelligence. In May 2024 at the AI Seoul Summit, 16 global AI tech companies agreed to safety commitments on the development of AI.
In March 2026, the United Nations convened the inaugural meeting of the Independent International Scientific Panel on AI, a 40-member expert body established under the Global Digital Compact to produce annual evidence-based reports on AI's societal impacts.
The study of mechanical or "formal" reasoning began with philosophers and mathematicians in antiquity. The study of logic led directly to Alan Turing's theory of computation, which suggested that a machine, by shuffling symbols as simple as "0" and "1", could simulate any conceivable form of mathematical reasoning. This, along with concurrent discoveries in cybernetics, information theory and neurobiology, led researchers to consider the possibility of building an "electronic brain".[r] They developed several areas of research that would become part of AI, such as McCulloch and Pitts design for "artificial neurons" in 1943, and Turing's influential 1950 paper 'Computing Machinery and Intelligence', which introduced the Turing test and showed that "machine intelligence" was plausible.
The field of AI research was founded at a workshop at Dartmouth College in 1956.[s] The first AI program, Logic Theorist, was presented at the workshop, created by future Turing Award winner Allen Newell and future Nobel Laureate Herbert A. Simon, in collaboration with J. C. Shaw. Many of the workshop attendees became the leaders of AI research in the 1960s.[t] They and their students produced programs that the press described as "astonishing":[u] computers were learning checkers strategies, solving word problems in algebra, proving logical theorems and speaking English.[v] Artificial intelligence laboratories were set up at a number of British and U.S. universities in the latter 1950s and early 1960s.
Researchers in the 1960s and the 1970s were convinced that their methods would eventually succeed in creating a machine with general intelligence and considered this the goal of their field. In 1965 Herbert Simon predicted, "machines will be capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do".In 1967 Marvin Minsky agreed, writing that "within a generation ... the problem of creating 'artificial intelligence' will substantially be solved". They had, however, underestimated the difficulty of the problem.[w] In 1974, both the U.S. and British governments cut off exploratory research in response to the criticism of Sir James Lighthill and ongoing pressure from the U.S. Congress to fund more productive projects. Minsky and Papert's book Perceptrons was understood as proving that artificial neural networks would never be useful for solving real-world tasks, thus discrediting the approach altogether. The "AI winter", a period when obtaining funding for AI projects was difficult, followed.
In the early 1980s, AI research was revived by the commercial success of expert systems, a form of AI program that simulated the knowledge and analytical skills of human experts. By 1985, the market for AI had reached over a billion dollars. At the same time, Japan's fifth generation computer project inspired the U.S. and British governments to restore funding for academic research. However, beginning with the collapse of the Lisp Machine market in 1987, AI once again fell into disrepute, and a second, longer-lasting winter began.
Up to this point, most of AI's funding had gone to projects that used high-level symbols to represent mental objects like plans, goals, beliefs, and known facts. In the 1980s, some researchers began to doubt that this approach would be able to imitate all the processes of human cognition, especially perception, robotics, learning and pattern recognition, and began to look into "sub-symbolic" approaches. Rodney Brooks rejected "representation" in general and focussed directly on engineering machines that move and survive.[x] Judea Pearl, Lotfi Zadeh, and others developed methods that handled incomplete and uncertain information by making reasonable guesses rather than precise logic. But the most important development was the revival of "connectionism", including neural network research, by Geoffrey Hinton and others. In 1990, Yann LeCun successfully showed that convolutional neural networks can recognise handwritten digits, the first of many successful applications of neural networks.
AI gradually restored its reputation in the late 1990s and early 21st century by exploiting formal mathematical methods and by finding specific solutions to specific problems. This "narrow" and "formal" focus allowed researchers to produce verifiable results and collaborate with other fields (such as statistics, economics and mathematics). By 2000, solutions developed by AI researchers were being widely used, although in the 1990s they were rarely described as "artificial intelligence" (a tendency known as the AI effect).
However, several academic researchers became concerned that AI was no longer pursuing its original goal of creating versatile, fully intelligent machines. Beginning around 2002, they founded the subfield of artificial general intelligence (or "AGI"), which had several well-funded institutions by the 2010s.
Deep learning began to dominate industry benchmarks in 2012 and was adopted throughout the field.
For many specific tasks, other methods were abandoned.[y]
Deep learning's success was based on both hardware improvements (faster computers, graphics processing units, cloud computing) and access to large amounts of data (including curated datasets, such as ImageNet). Neural-network approaches also advanced natural language processing. In 2013, word2vec introduced efficient methods for learning distributed word representations. In 2014–2015, sequence-to-sequence and attention mechanisms advanced neural machine translation.
Deep learning's success led to an enormous increase in interest and funding in AI.[z] The amount of machine learning research (measured by total publications) increased by 50% in the years 2015–2019.
In 2016, issues of fairness and the misuse of technology were catapulted into centre stage at machine learning conferences, publications vastly increased, funding became available, and many researchers re-focussed their careers on these issues. The alignment problem became a serious field of academic study.
In 2015, AlphaGo, developed by DeepMind, beat the world champion Go player. The program taught only the game's rules and developed a strategy by itself. GPT-3 is a large language model that was released in 2020 by OpenAI and is capable of generating high-quality human-like text. ChatGPT, launched on 30 November 2022, became the fastest-growing consumer software application in history, gaining over 100 million users in two months. It marked what is widely regarded as AI's breakout year, bringing it into the public consciousness. These programs, and others, inspired an aggressive AI boom, where large companies began investing billions of dollars in AI research. According to AI Impacts, about US$50 billion annually was invested in "AI" around 2022 in the U.S. alone and about 20% of the new U.S. computer science PhD graduates have specialised in "AI". About 800,000 "AI"-related U.S. job openings existed in 2022. According to PitchBook research, 22% of newly funded startups in 2024 claimed to be AI companies.
Philosophical debates have historically sought to determine the nature of intelligence and how to make intelligent machines. Another major focus has been whether machines can be conscious, and the associated ethical implications. Many other topics in philosophy are relevant to AI, such as epistemology and free will. Rapid advancements have intensified public discussions on the philosophy and ethics of AI.
Alan Turing investigated whether machines can show intelligent behaviour and think. In 1950, he proposed the Turing test, which measures the ability of a machine to simulate human conversation. Since we can only observe the behaviour of the machine, it does not matter if it is "actually" thinking or literally has a "mind". Turing notes that we can not determine these things about other people but "it is usual to have a polite convention that everyone thinks."
Russell and Norvig agree with Turing that intelligence must be defined in terms of external behaviour, not internal structure. However, they are critical that the test requires the machine to imitate humans. "Aeronautical engineering texts", they wrote, "do not define the goal of their field as making 'machines that fly so exactly like pigeons that they can fool other pigeons.'" AI founder John McCarthy agreed, writing that "Artificial intelligence is not, by definition, simulation of human intelligence".
McCarthy defines intelligence as "the computational part of the ability to achieve goals in the world". Another AI founder, Marvin Minsky, similarly describes it as "the ability to solve hard problems". Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach defines it as the study of agents that perceive their environment and take actions that maximise their chances of achieving defined goals.
The many differing definitions of AI have been critically analysed. During the 2020s AI boom, the term has been used as a marketing buzzword to promote products and services which do not use AI.
The International Organization for Standardization describes an AI system as a "an engineered system that generates outputs such as content, forecasts, recommendations, or decisions for a given set of human‑defined objectives, and can operate with varying levels of automation". The EU AI Act defines an AI system as "a machine-based system that is designed to operate with varying levels of autonomy and that may exhibit adaptiveness after deployment, and that, for explicit or implicit objectives, infers, from the input it receives, how to generate outputs such as predictions, content, recommendations, or decisions that can influence physical or virtual environments". In the United States, influential but non‑binding guidance such as the National Institute of Standards and Technology's AI Risk Management Framework describes an AI system as "an engineered or machine-based system that can, for a given set of objectives, generate outputs such as predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual environments. AI systems are designed to operate with varying levels of autonomy".
No established unifying theory or paradigm has guided AI research for most of its history.[aa] The unprecedented success of statistical machine learning in the 2010s eclipsed all other approaches (so much so that some sources, especially in the business world, use the term "artificial intelligence" to mean "machine learning with neural networks"). This approach is mostly sub-symbolic, soft and narrow.
Symbolic AI (or "GOFAI") simulated the high-level conscious reasoning that people use when they solve puzzles, express legal reasoning and do mathematics. It was highly successful at some "intelligent" tasks such as algebra or IQ tests. In 1976, Newell and Simon proposed the physical symbol systems hypothesis: "A physical symbol system has the necessary and sufficient means of general intelligent action."
However, the symbolic approach failed on many tasks that humans solve easily, such as learning, recognising an object or commonsense reasoning. Moravec's paradox is the discovery that high-level "intelligent" tasks were easy for AI, but low level "instinctive" tasks were extremely difficult. Philosopher Hubert Dreyfus had argued since the 1960s that human expertise depends on embodied, situational know-how that is not representable as explicit symbolic rules rather than conscious symbol manipulation, and on having a "feel" for the situation, rather than explicit symbolic knowledge. Although his arguments had been ridiculed and ignored when they were first presented, eventually, AI research came to agree with him.[ab]
The issue is not resolved: sub-symbolic reasoning can make many of the same inscrutable mistakes that human intuition does, such as algorithmic bias. Critics such as Noam Chomsky argue continuing research into symbolic AI will still be necessary to attain general intelligence, in part because sub-symbolic AI is a move away from explainable AI: it can be difficult or impossible to understand why a modern statistical AI program made a particular decision. The emerging field of neuro-symbolic artificial intelligence attempts to bridge the two approaches.
"Neats" hope that intelligent behaviour is described using simple, elegant principles (such as logic or optimisation). "Scruffies" expect that it necessarily requires solving a large number of unrelated problems. Neats defend their programs with theoretical rigour, scruffies rely mainly on incremental testing to see if they work. This issue was actively discussed in the 1970s and 1980s. The rise of deep learning may represent a shift toward the scruffies.
Finding a provably correct or optimal solution is intractable for many important problems. Soft computing is a set of techniques, including genetic algorithms, fuzzy logic and neural networks, that are tolerant of imprecision, uncertainty, partial truth and approximation. Soft computing was introduced in the late 1980s and most successful AI programs in the 21st century are examples of soft computing with neural networks.
AI researchers are divided as to whether to pursue the goals of artificial general intelligence and superintelligence directly or to solve as many specific problems as possible (narrow AI) in hopes these solutions will lead indirectly to the field's long-term goals. General intelligence is difficult to define and difficult to measure, and modern AI has had more verifiable successes by focusing on specific problems with specific solutions. The sub-field of artificial general intelligence studies this area exclusively.
There is no settled consensus in philosophy of mind on whether a machine can have a mind, consciousness or subjective experiences in the same sense that human beings do. This issue considers the internal experiences of the machine, rather than its external behaviour. Mainstream AI research considers this issue irrelevant because it does not affect the goals of the field: to build machines that can solve problems using intelligence. Russell and Norvig add that "[t]he additional project of making a machine conscious in exactly the way humans are is not one that we are equipped to take on." However, the question has become central to the philosophy of mind. It is also typically the central question at issue in artificial intelligence in fiction.
David Chalmers identified two problems in understanding the mind, which he named the "hard" and "easy" problems of consciousness. The easy problem is understanding how the brain processes signals, makes plans and controls behaviour. The hard problem is explaining how this feels or why it should feel like anything at all, assuming we are right in thinking that it truly does feel like something (Dennett's consciousness illusionism says this is an illusion). While human information processing is easy to explain, human subjective experience is difficult to explain. For example, it is easy to imagine a colour-blind person who has learned to identify which objects in their field of view are red, but it is not clear what would be required for the person to know what red looks like.
Computationalism is the position in the philosophy of mind that the human mind is an information processing system and that thinking is a form of computing. Computationalism argues that the relationship between mind and body is similar or identical to the relationship between software and hardware and thus may be a solution to the mind–body problem. This philosophical position was inspired by the work of AI researchers and cognitive scientists in the 1960s and was originally proposed by philosophers Jerry Fodor and Hilary Putnam.
Philosopher John Searle characterised this position as "strong AI": "The appropriately programmed computer with the right inputs and outputs would thereby have a mind in exactly the same sense human beings have minds."[ac] Searle challenges this claim with his Chinese room argument, which attempts to show that even a computer capable of perfectly simulating human behaviour would not have a mind.
It is difficult or impossible to reliably evaluate whether an advanced AI is sentient (has the ability to feel), and if so, to what degree. But if there is a significant chance that a given machine can feel and suffer, then it may be entitled to certain rights or welfare protection measures, similarly to animals. Sapience (a set of capacities related to high intelligence, such as discernment or self-awareness) may provide another moral basis for AI rights. Robot rights are also sometimes proposed as a practical way to integrate autonomous agents into society.
In 2017, the European Union considered granting "electronic personhood" to some of the most capable AI systems. Similarly to the legal status of companies, it would have conferred rights but also responsibilities. Critics argued in 2018 that granting rights to AI systems would downplay the importance of human rights, and that legislation should focus on user needs rather than speculative futuristic scenarios. They also noted that robots lacked the autonomy to take part in society on their own.
Progress in AI increased interest in the topic. Proponents of AI welfare and rights often argue that AI sentience, if it emerges, would be particularly easy to deny. They warn that this may be a moral blind spot analogous to slavery or factory farming, which could lead to large-scale suffering if sentient AI is created and carelessly exploited.
A superintelligence is a hypothetical agent that would possess intelligence far surpassing that of the brightest and most gifted human mind. If research into artificial general intelligence produced sufficiently intelligent software, it might be able to reprogram and improve itself. The improved software would be even better at improving itself, leading to what I. J. Good called an "intelligence explosion" and Vernor Vinge called a "singularity".
In Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, Russel and Norvig cast doubt on the possibility of a singularity, arguing that "so far, every technology has followed an S-shaped curve", and that "sometimes it is not possible to keep the growth going."
Robot designer Hans Moravec, cyberneticist Kevin Warwick and inventor Ray Kurzweil have predicted that humans and machines may merge in the future into cyborgs that are more capable and powerful than either. This idea, called transhumanism, has roots in the writings of Aldous Huxley and Robert Ettinger.
Edward Fredkin argues that "artificial intelligence is the next step in evolution", an idea first proposed by Samuel Butler's "Darwin among the Machines" as far back as 1863, and expanded upon by George Dyson in his 1998 book Darwin Among the Machines: The Evolution of Global Intelligence.
Thought-capable artificial beings have appeared as storytelling devices since antiquity, and have been a persistent theme in science fiction.
A common trope in these works began with Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, where a human creation becomes a threat to its masters. This includes such works as Arthur C. Clarke's and Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey (both 1968), with HAL 9000, the murderous computer in charge of the Discovery One spaceship, as well as Blade Runner (1982), The Terminator (1984) and The Matrix (1999). In contrast, the rare loyal robots such as Gort from The Day the Earth Stood Still (1951) and Bishop from Aliens (1986) are less prominent in popular culture.
Isaac Asimov introduced the Three Laws of Robotics in many stories, most notably with the "Multivac" super-intelligent computer. Asimov's laws are often brought up during lay discussions of machine ethics; while almost all artificial intelligence researchers are familiar with Asimov's laws through popular culture, they generally consider the laws useless for many reasons, one of which is their ambiguity.
Several works use AI to force us to confront the fundamental question of what makes us human, showing us artificial beings that have the ability to feel, and thus to suffer. This appears in Karel Čapek's R.U.R., the films A.I. Artificial Intelligence and Ex Machina, as well as the novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?, by Philip K. Dick. Dick considers the idea that our understanding of human subjectivity is altered by technology created with artificial intelligence.
Artificial general intelligence (AGI) is a hypothetical type of artificial intelligence that matches or surpasses human capabilities across virtually all cognitive tasks. Unlike artificial narrow intelligence (ANI), whose competence is confined to well‑defined tasks, an AGI system can generalise knowledge, transfer skills between domains, and solve novel problems without task‑specific reprogramming.
Creating AGI is a stated goal of technology companies such as OpenAI, Google, SpaceXAI, and Meta. A 2020 survey identified 72 active AGI research and development projects across 37 countries.
AGI is a common topic in science fiction and futures studies.
Contention exists over whether AGI represents an existential risk. Some AI experts and industry figures have stated that mitigating the risk of human extinction posed by AGI should be a global priority. Others find the development of AGI to be in too remote a stage to present such a risk.
AGI is also known as strong AI, full AI, human-level AI, human-level intelligent AI, or general intelligent action.
The term "artificial general intelligence" was used in 1997 by Mark Gubrud in a discussion of the implications of fully automated military production and operations. A mathematical formalism of AGI named AIXI was proposed in 2000 by Marcus Hutter, who defines intelligence as "an agent's ability to achieve goals or succeed in a wide range of environments". This type of AGI has also been called "universal artificial intelligence". The term AGI was re-introduced and popularized by Shane Legg and Ben Goertzel around 2002.
Some academic sources reserve the term "strong AI" for computer programs that will experience sentience or consciousness.[a] In contrast, weak AI (or narrow AI) can solve a specific problem but lacks general cognitive abilities. Some academic sources use "weak AI" to refer more broadly to any programs that neither experience consciousness nor have a mind in the same sense as humans.[a]
Related concepts include artificial superintelligence and transformative AI. An artificial superintelligence (ASI) is a hypothetical type of AGI that is much more generally intelligent than humans, while the notion of transformative AI relates to AI having a large impact on society, for example, similar to the agricultural or industrial revolution.
A framework for classifying AGI was proposed in 2023 by Google DeepMind researchers. They define five performance levels of AGI: emerging, competent, expert, virtuoso, and superhuman. For example, a competent AGI is defined as an AI that outperforms 50% of skilled adults in a wide range of non-physical tasks, and a superhuman AGI (i.e., an artificial superintelligence) is similarly defined but with a threshold of 100%. They consider large language models like ChatGPT or LLaMA 2 to be instances of emerging AGI (comparable to unskilled humans). Regarding the autonomy of AGI and associated risks, they define five levels: tool (fully in human control), consultant, collaborator, expert, and agent (fully autonomous).
There is no single agreed-upon definition of intelligence as applied to computers. Computer scientist John McCarthy wrote in 2007: "We cannot yet characterize in general what kinds of computational procedures we want to call intelligent."
Researchers generally hold that a system is required to do all of the following to be regarded as an AGI:
Many interdisciplinary approaches (e.g. cognitive science, computational intelligence, and decision making) consider additional traits such as imagination (the ability to form novel mental images and concepts) and autonomy.
Computer-based systems exhibiting these capabilities are now widespread, with modern large language models demonstrating computational creativity, automated reasoning, and decision support simultaneously across domains.
Other capabilities are considered desirable in intelligent systems, as they may affect intelligence or aid in its expression. These include:
This includes the ability to detect and respond to hazard.
Several tests meant to confirm human-level AGI have been considered.
The Turing test was proposed by Alan Turing in his 1950 paper "Computing Machinery and Intelligence". This test involves a human judge engaging in natural language conversations with both a human and a machine designed to generate human-like responses. The machine passes the test if it can convince the judge that it is human a significant fraction of the time. Turing proposed this as a practical measure of machine intelligence, focusing on the ability to produce human-like responses rather than on the internal workings of the machine.
The idea of the test is that the machine has to try and pretend to be a man, by answering questions put to it, and it will only pass if the pretence is reasonably convincing. A considerable portion of a jury, who should not be experts about machines, must be taken in by the pretence.In 2014, a chatbot named Eugene Goostman, designed to imitate a 13-year-old Ukrainian boy, reportedly passed a Turing Test event by convincing 33% of judges that it was human. However, this claim was met with significant skepticism from the AI research community, who questioned the test's implementation and its relevance to AGI.
A 2025 pre‑registered, three‑party Turing‑test study by Cameron R. Jones and Benjamin K. Bergen showed that GPT-4.5 was judged to be the human in 73% of five‑minute text conversations—surpassing the 67% humanness rate of real confederates and meeting the researchers' criterion for having passed the test.
The "Ikea test", also known as the Flat Pack Furniture Test, involves an AI controlling a robot which attempts to assemble an Ikea flat-pack furniture product after having been shown the parts and instructions. As early as 2013, MIT's IkeaBot demonstrated fully autonomous multi-robot assembly of an IKEA Lack table in ten minutes, with no human intervention and no pre-programmed assembly instructions. The robots inferred the assembly sequence from the geometry of the parts alone.
Steve Wozniak proposed a test where a machine is required to enter an average American home and figure out how to make coffee. It must find the coffee machine, find the coffee, add water, find a mug, and brew the coffee by pushing the proper buttons. This test has been substantially approached across multiple systems. In January 2024, Figure AI's Figure 01 humanoid learned to operate a Keurig coffee machine autonomously after watching video demonstrations, using end-to-end neural networks to translate visual input into motor actions. In 2025, researchers at the University of Edinburgh published the ELLMER framework in Nature Machine Intelligence, demonstrating a robotic arm that interprets verbal instructions, analyses its surroundings, and autonomously makes coffee in dynamic kitchen environments — adapting to unforeseen obstacles in real time rather than following pre-programmed sequences.
Mustafa Suleyman's test proposes giving an AI model US$100,000 and asking it to obtain US$1 million.
Adams, et al. propose that the ability to learn and succeed in a wide range of video games can be used to test AI intelligence. This range would include games unknown to the AGI developers before the test is administered.
A problem is informally called "AI-complete" or "AI-hard" if it is believed that AGI would be needed to solve it, because the solution is beyond the capabilities of a purpose-specific algorithm.
Modern AI research began in the mid-1950s. The first generation of AI researchers were convinced that artificial general intelligence was possible and that it would exist in just a few decades. AI pioneer Herbert A. Simon wrote in 1965: "machines will be capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do".
Their predictions were the inspiration for Stanley Kubrick and Arthur C. Clarke's fictional character HAL 9000, who embodied what AI researchers believed they could create by the year 2001. AI pioneer Marvin Minsky was a consultant on the project of making HAL 9000 as realistic as possible according to the consensus predictions of the time. He said in 1967, "Within a generation... the problem of creating 'artificial intelligence' will substantially be solved".
Several classical AI projects, such as Douglas Lenat's Cyc project (that began in 1984), and Allen Newell's Soar project, were directed at AGI.
However, in the early 1970s, it became obvious that researchers had grossly underestimated the difficulty of the project. Funding agencies became skeptical of AGI and put researchers under increasing pressure to produce useful "applied AI".[b] In the early 1980s, Japan's Fifth Generation Computer Project revived interest in AGI, setting out a ten-year timeline that included AGI goals like "carry on a casual conversation". In response to this and the success of expert systems, both industry and government pumped money into the field. However, confidence in AI spectacularly collapsed in the late 1980s, and the goals of the Fifth Generation Computer Project were never fulfilled. For the second time in 20 years, AI researchers who predicted the imminent achievement of AGI had been mistaken. By the 1990s, AI researchers had a reputation for making vain promises. They became reluctant to make predictions at all[c] and avoided mention of "human level" artificial intelligence for fear of being labeled "wild-eyed dreamer[s]".
In the 1990s and early 21st century, mainstream AI achieved commercial success and academic respectability by focusing on specific sub-problems where AI can produce verifiable results and commercial applications, such as speech recognition and recommendation algorithms. These "applied AI" systems are now used extensively throughout the technology industry, and research in this vein is heavily funded in both academia and industry. As of 2018[update], development in this field was considered an emerging trend, and a mature stage was expected to be reached in more than 10 years.
At the turn of the century, many mainstream AI researchers hoped that strong AI could be developed by combining programs that solve various sub-problems. Hans Moravec wrote in 1988: I am confident that this bottom-up route to artificial intelligence will one day meet the traditional top-down route more than halfway, ready to provide the real-world competence and the commonsense knowledge that has been so frustratingly elusive in reasoning programs. Fully intelligent machines will result when the metaphorical golden spike is driven, uniting the two efforts.
However, even at the time, this was disputed. For example, Stevan Harnad of Princeton University concluded his 1990 paper on the symbol grounding hypothesis by stating: The expectation has often been voiced that "top-down" (symbolic) approaches to modeling cognition will somehow meet "bottom-up" (sensory) approaches somewhere in between. If the grounding considerations in this paper are valid, then this expectation is hopelessly modular and there is really only one viable route from sense to symbols: from the ground up. A free-floating symbolic level like the software level of a computer will never be reached by this route (or vice versa) – nor is it clear why we should even try to reach such a level, since it looks as if getting there would just amount to uprooting our symbols from their intrinsic meanings (thereby merely reducing ourselves to the functional equivalent of a programmable computer).As of 2023, the development and potential achievement of AGI remains a subject of intense debate within the AI community. While traditional consensus held that AGI was a distant goal, recent advancements have led some researchers and industry figures to claim that early forms of AGI may already exist. AI pioneer Herbert A. Simon speculated in 1965 that "machines will be capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do". This prediction failed to come true. Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen believed that such intelligence is unlikely in the 21st century because it would require "unforeseeable and fundamentally unpredictable breakthroughs" and a "scientifically deep understanding of cognition". Writing in The Guardian, roboticist Alan Winfield claimed in 2014 that the gulf between modern computing and human-level artificial intelligence is as wide as the gulf between current space flight and practical faster-than-light spaceflight.
An additional challenge is the lack of clarity in defining what intelligence entails. Questions regarding consciousness, goal-setting, emotional capabilities, reasoning and brain replication remain contested within the broader research community, as does whether intelligence emerges as a consequence of scale.
Most AI researchers believe strong AI can be achieved in the future, but some thinkers, like Hubert Dreyfus and Roger Penrose, deny the possibility of achieving strong AI. John McCarthy is among those who believe human-level AI will be accomplished, but that the present level of progress is such that a date cannot accurately be predicted. AI experts' views on the feasibility of AGI wax and wane. Four polls conducted in 2012 and 2013 suggested that the median estimate among experts for when they would be 50% confident AGI would arrive was 2040 to 2050, depending on the poll, with the mean being 2081. Of the experts, 16.5% answered with "never" when asked the same question, but with a 90% confidence instead. Further current AGI progress considerations can be found above Tests for confirming human-level AGI.
A report by Stuart Armstrong and Kaj Sotala of the Machine Intelligence Research Institute found that "over [a] 60-year time frame there is a strong bias towards predicting the arrival of human-level AI as between 15 and 25 years from the time the prediction was made". They analyzed 95 predictions made between 1950 and 2012 on when human-level AI will come about.
In 2023, Microsoft researchers published a detailed evaluation of GPT-4. They concluded: "Given the breadth and depth of GPT-4's capabilities, we believe that it could reasonably be viewed as an early (yet still incomplete) version of an artificial general intelligence (AGI) system." Another study in 2023 reported that GPT-4 outperforms 99% of humans on the Torrance tests of creative thinking.
Blaise Agüera y Arcas and Peter Norvig wrote in 2023 the article "Artificial General Intelligence Is Already Here", arguing that frontier models had already achieved a significant level of general intelligence. They wrote that reluctance to this view comes from four main reasons: a "healthy skepticism about metrics for AGI", an "ideological commitment to alternative AI theories or techniques", a "devotion to human (or biological) exceptionalism", or a "concern about the economic implications of AGI".
Progress in artificial intelligence has historically gone through periods of rapid progress separated by periods when progress appeared to stop. Ending each hiatus were fundamental advances in hardware, software or both to create space for further progress. For example, the computer hardware available in the twentieth century was not sufficient to implement deep learning, which requires large numbers of GPU-enabled CPUs.
In the introduction to his 2006 book, Goertzel says that estimates of the time needed before a truly flexible AGI is built vary from 10 years to over a century. As of 2007[update], the consensus in the AGI research community seemed to be that the timeline discussed by Ray Kurzweil in 2005 in The Singularity is Near (i.e. between 2015 and 2045) was plausible. Mainstream AI researchers have given a wide range of opinions on whether progress will be this rapid. A 2012 meta-analysis of 95 such opinions found a bias towards predicting that the onset of AGI would occur within 16–26 years for modern and historical predictions alike. That paper has been criticized for how it categorized opinions as expert or non-expert.
In 2012, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey Hinton developed a neural network called AlexNet, which won the ImageNet competition with a top-5 test error rate of 15.3%, significantly better than the second-best entry's rate of 26.3% (the traditional approach used a weighted sum of scores from different pre-defined classifiers). AlexNet was regarded as the initial ground-breaker of the current deep learning wave.
In 2017, researchers Feng Liu, Yong Shi, and Ying Liu conducted intelligence tests on publicly available and freely accessible weak AI such as Google AI, Apple's Siri, and others. At the maximum, these AIs reached an IQ value of about 47, which corresponds approximately to a six-year-old child in first grade. An adult comes to about 100 on average. Similar tests were carried out in 2014, with the IQ score reaching a maximum value of 27.
In 2020, OpenAI developed GPT-3, a language model capable of performing many diverse tasks without specific training. According to Gary Grossman in a VentureBeat article, while there is consensus that GPT-3 is not an example of AGI, it is considered by some to be too advanced to be classified as a narrow AI system.
In the same year, Jason Rohrer used his GPT-3 account to develop a chatbot, and provided a chatbot-developing platform called "Project December". OpenAI asked for changes to the chatbot to comply with their safety guidelines; Rohrer disconnected Project December from the GPT-3 API.
In 2022, DeepMind developed Gato, a "general-purpose" system capable of performing more than 600 different tasks.
In 2023, AI researcher Geoffrey Hinton stated that:
The idea that this stuff could actually get smarter than people – a few people believed that, [...]. But most people thought it was way off. And I thought it was way off. I thought it was 30 to 50 years or even longer away. Obviously, I no longer think that.He estimated in 2024 (with low confidence) that systems smarter than humans could appear within 5 to 20 years and stressed the attendant existential risks.
In May 2023, Demis Hassabis similarly said that "The progress in the last few years has been pretty incredible", and that he sees no reason why it would slow, expecting AGI within a decade or even a few years. In March 2024, Nvidia's Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Jensen Huang, stated his expectation that within five years, AI would be capable of passing any test at least as well as humans. In June 2024, the AI researcher Leopold Aschenbrenner, a former OpenAI employee, estimated AGI by 2027 to be "strikingly plausible".
In September 2025, a review of surveys of scientists and industry experts from the last 15 years reported that most agreed that artificial general intelligence (AGI) will occur before the year 2100. A more recent analysis by AIMultiple reported that, "Current surveys of AI researchers are predicting AGI around 2040".
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman said in December 2025 that "we built AGIs" and that "AGI kinda went whooshing by" with less societal impact than expected, proposing the field move on to defining superintelligence. In 2026, OpenAI's president Greg Brockman claimed that the company's model GPT-6 Astra marked the beginning of the "AGI era".
While the development of transformer models like in ChatGPT is considered the most promising path to AGI, whole brain emulation can serve as an alternative approach. With whole brain simulation, a brain model is built by scanning and mapping a biological brain in detail, and then copying and simulating it on a computer system or another computational device. The simulation model must be sufficiently faithful to the original, so that it behaves in practically the same way as the original brain. Whole brain emulation is a type of brain simulation that is discussed in computational neuroscience and neuroinformatics, and for medical research purposes. It has been discussed in artificial intelligence research as an approach to strong AI. Neuroimaging technologies that could deliver the necessary detailed understanding are improving rapidly, and futurist Ray Kurzweil in the book The Singularity Is Near predicts that a map of sufficient quality will become available on a similar timescale to the computing power required to emulate it.
 For low-level brain simulation, a very powerful cluster of computers or GPUs would be required, given the enormous quantity of synapses within the human brain. Each of the 1011 (one hundred billion) neurons has on average 7,000 synaptic connections (synapses) to other neurons. The brain of a three-year-old child has about 1015 synapses (1 quadrillion). This number declines with age, stabilizing by adulthood. Estimates vary for an adult, ranging from 1014 to 5×1014 synapses (100 to 500 trillion). An estimate of the brain's processing power, based on a simple switch model for neuron activity, is around 1014 (100 trillion) synaptic updates per second (SUPS).
In 1997, Kurzweil looked at various estimates for the hardware required to equal the human brain and adopted a figure of 1016 computations per second.[d] (For comparison, if a "computation" was equivalent to one "floating-point operation" – a measure used to rate current supercomputers – then 1016 "computations" would be equivalent to 10 petaFLOPS, achieved in 2011, while 1018 was achieved in 2022.) He used this figure to predict that the necessary hardware would be available sometime between 2015 and 2025, if the exponential growth in computer power at the time of writing continued.
The Human Brain Project, an EU-funded initiative active from 2013 to 2023, has developed a particularly detailed and publicly accessible atlas of the human brain. In 2023, researchers from Duke University performed a high-resolution scan of a mouse brain.
The artificial neuron model assumed by Kurzweil and used in many current artificial neural network implementations is simple compared with biological neurons. A brain simulation would likely have to capture the detailed cellular behaviour of biological neurons, presently understood only in broad outline. The overhead introduced by full modeling of the biological, chemical, and physical details of neural behaviour (especially on a molecular scale) would require computational powers several orders of magnitude larger than Kurzweil's estimate. In addition, the estimates do not account for glial cells, which are known to play a role in cognitive processes.
A fundamental criticism of the simulated brain approach derives from embodied cognition theory, which asserts that human embodiment is an essential aspect of human intelligence and is necessary to ground meaning. If this theory is correct, any fully functional brain model will need to encompass more than just the neurons (e.g., a robotic body). Goertzel proposes virtual embodiment (like in metaverses like Second Life) as an option, but it is unknown whether this would be sufficient.
In 1980, philosopher John Searle coined the term "strong AI" as part of his Chinese room argument. He proposed a distinction between two hypotheses about artificial intelligence:[e]
The first one he called "strong" because it makes a stronger statement: it assumes something special has happened to the machine that goes beyond those abilities that we can test. The behaviour of a "weak AI" machine would be identical to a "strong AI" machine, but the latter would also have subjective conscious experience. This usage is also common in academic AI research and textbooks.
In contrast to Searle and mainstream AI, some futurists such as Ray Kurzweil use the term "strong AI" to mean "human level artificial general intelligence". This is not the same as Searle's strong AI, unless it is assumed that consciousness is necessary for human-level AGI. Academic philosophers such as Searle do not believe that is the case, and to most artificial intelligence researchers, the question is out of scope.
Mainstream AI is most interested in how a program behaves. According to Russell and Norvig, "as long as the program works, they don't care if you call it real or a simulation." If the program can behave as if it has a mind, then there is no need to know if it actually has a mind – indeed, there would be no way to tell. For AI research, Searle's "weak AI hypothesis" is equivalent to the statement "artificial general intelligence is possible". Thus, according to Russell and Norvig, "most AI researchers take the weak AI hypothesis for granted, and don't care about the strong AI hypothesis." Thus, for academic AI research, "Strong AI" and "AGI" are two different things.
Consciousness can have various meanings, and some aspects play significant roles in science fiction and the ethics of artificial intelligence:
These traits have a moral dimension. AI sentience would give rise to concerns of welfare and legal protection, similarly to animals. Other aspects of consciousness related to cognitive capabilities are also relevant to the concept of AI rights. Figuring out how to integrate advanced AI with existing legal and social frameworks is an emergent issue.
AGI could improve productivity and efficiency in most jobs. It could take care of the elderly, and democratize access to rapid, high-quality medical diagnostics. It could offer fun, inexpensive and personalized education. The need to work to subsist could become obsolete if the wealth produced is properly redistributed. This also raises the question of the place of humans in a radically automated society.
AGI could also help to make rational decisions, and to anticipate and prevent disasters. It could also help to reap the benefits of potentially catastrophic technologies such as nanotechnology or climate engineering, while avoiding the associated risks. If an AGI's primary goal is to prevent existential catastrophes such as human extinction (which could be difficult if the Vulnerable World Hypothesis turns out to be true), it could take measures to drastically reduce the risks while minimizing the impact of these measures on humanity's quality of life.
AGI may represent multiple types of existential risk, which are risks that threaten "the premature extinction of Earth-originating intelligent life or the permanent and drastic destruction of its potential for desirable future development". The risk of human extinction from AGI has been the topic of many debates, but there is also the possibility that the development of AGI would lead to a permanently flawed future. Notably, it could be used to spread and preserve the set of values of whoever develops it. If humanity still has moral blind spots similar to slavery in the past, AGI might irreversibly entrench them, preventing moral progress. Furthermore, AGI could facilitate mass surveillance and indoctrination, which could be used to create an entrenched repressive worldwide totalitarian regime. There is also a risk for the machines themselves. If machines that are sentient or otherwise worthy of moral consideration are mass-created in the future, engaging in a civilizational path that indefinitely neglects their welfare and interests could be an existential catastrophe. Considering how much AGI could improve humanity's future and help reduce other existential risks, Toby Ord calls these existential risks "an argument for proceeding with due caution", not for "abandoning AI".
The thesis that AI poses an existential risk for humans, and that this risk needs more attention, is controversial but has been endorsed in 2023 by many public figures, AI researchers and CEOs of AI companies such as Elon Musk, Bill Gates, Geoffrey Hinton, Yoshua Bengio, Demis Hassabis and Sam Altman.
In 2014, Stephen Hawking criticized widespread indifference:
So, facing possible futures of incalculable benefits and risks, the experts are surely doing everything possible to ensure the best outcome, right? Wrong. If a superior alien civilisation sent us a message saying, 'We'll arrive in a few decades,' would we just reply, 'OK, call us when you get here—we'll leave the lights on?' Probably not—but this is more or less what is happening with AI.The potential fate of humanity has sometimes been compared to the fate of gorillas threatened by human activities. The comparison states that greater intelligence allowed humanity to dominate gorillas, which are now vulnerable in ways that they could not have anticipated. As a result, the gorilla has become an endangered species, not out of malice, but simply as collateral damage from human activities.
The skeptic Yann LeCun considers that AGIs will have no desire to dominate humanity and that we should be careful not to anthropomorphize them and interpret their intentions as we would for humans. He said that people will not be "smart enough to design super-intelligent machines, yet ridiculously stupid to the point of giving it moronic objectives with no safeguards". On the other side, the concept of instrumental convergence suggests that almost whatever their goals, intelligent agents will have reasons to try to survive and acquire more power as intermediary steps to achieving these goals. And that this does not require having emotions.
Many scholars who are concerned about existential risk advocate for more research into solving the "control problem" to answer the question: what types of safeguards, algorithms, or architectures can programmers implement to maximise the probability that their recursively-improving AI would continue to behave in a friendly, rather than destructive, manner after it reaches superintelligence? Solving the control problem is complicated by the AI arms race (which could lead to a race to the bottom of safety precautions in order to release products before competitors), and the use of AI in weapon systems.
The thesis that AI can pose existential risk also has detractors. Skeptics usually say that AGI is unlikely in the short term, or that concerns about AGI distract from other issues related to current AI. Former Google fraud czar Shuman Ghosemajumder considers that for many people outside of the technology industry, existing chatbots and LLMs are already perceived as though they were AGI, leading to further misunderstanding and fear.
Some researchers, including Google Brain co-founder Andrew Ng, have said that the communication campaigns about the supposed existential risks of AI pushed by certain AI companies (such as OpenAI, Anthropic, DeepMind, and Conjecture) may be an at attempt at creating regulatory capture and to inflate interest in their products.
In 2023, the CEOs of Google DeepMind, OpenAI and Anthropic, along with other industry leaders and researchers, issued a joint statement asserting that "Mitigating the risk of extinction from AI should be a global priority alongside other societal-scale risks such as pandemics and nuclear war."
Researchers from OpenAI estimated in 2023 that "80% of the U.S. workforce could have at least 10% of their work tasks affected by the introduction of LLMs, while around 19% of workers may see at least 50% of their tasks impacted". They consider office workers to be the most exposed, for example mathematicians, accountants or web designers. AGI could have a better autonomy, ability to make decisions, to interface with other computer tools, but also to control robotized bodies. A common belief among top AI company insiders is that most workers will face technological unemployment from AGI, starting with white-collar jobs and, as robotics improves, extending to blue-collar jobs. Critics of the idea argue that AGI will complement rather than replace humans, and that automation displaces work in the short term but not in the long term.
According to Stephen Hawking, the outcome of automation on the quality of life will depend on how the wealth will be redistributed:
Everyone can enjoy a life of luxurious leisure if the machine-produced wealth is shared, or most people can end up miserably poor if the machine-owners successfully lobby against wealth redistribution. So far, the trend seems to be toward the second option, with technology driving ever-increasing inequalityElon Musk argued in 2021 that the automation of society will require governments to adopt a universal basic income (UBI). Hinton similarly advised the UK government in 2025 to adopt a UBI as a response to AI-induced unemployment. In 2023, Hinton said "I'm a socialist [...] I think that private ownership of the media, and of the 'means of computation', is not good."
A.I. Artificial Intelligence (or simply A.I.) is a 2001 American science fiction drama film written and directed by Steven Spielberg. The screenplay by Spielberg is based on a screen story by Ian Watson adapting the 1969 short story "Supertoys Last All Summer Long" by Brian Aldiss. Set in a futuristic society, the film stars Haley Joel Osment as David, a childlike android uniquely programmed with the ability to love. Jude Law, Frances O'Connor, Brendan Gleeson and William Hurt star in supporting roles.
Development of A.I. originally began after producer and director Stanley Kubrick acquired the rights to Aldiss's story in the early 1970s. Kubrick hired a series of writers, including Aldiss, Watson, Bob Shaw, and Sara Maitland, until the mid-1990s. The film languished in development hell for years, partly because Kubrick felt that computer-generated imagery was not advanced enough to create the David character, which he believed no child actor would convincingly portray. In 1995, Kubrick handed A.I. to Spielberg while the former's production company remained attached, but the film did not gain momentum until Kubrick died in 1999. Spielberg remained close to Watson's treatment for the screenplay and dedicated the film to Kubrick.
A.I. Artificial Intelligence was released on June 29, 2001, by Warner Bros. Pictures, DreamWorks Pictures, Amblin Entertainment, and Stanley Kubrick Productions. Warner Bros. and DreamWorks shared distribution duties. It received generally positive reviews from critics and grossed $235.9 million against a budget of $90–100 million. It was also nominated for Best Visual Effects and Best Original Score (for John Williams) at the 74th Academy Awards. In a 2016 BBC poll of 177 critics around the world, A.I. Artificial Intelligence was voted the eighty-third greatest film since 2000.
In the 22nd century, rising sea levels caused by global warming have wiped out coastal cities and altered the world's climate. With the human population in decline, advanced nations have created humanoid robots called mechas (diminutive of Mechanic) to fulfill various roles in society.
In Madison, New Jersey, David, an 11-year-old prototype mecha child capable of experiencing love, is given to Monica Swinton and her husband, Henry, whose son, Martin, is in suspended animation after contracting a rare disease. Initially uncomfortable with David, Monica eventually warms to him and activates his imprinting protocol. Touched by his love for her, she introduces him to Teddy, Martin's old robotic teddy bear, and the two become friends.
After Martin is unexpectedly cured of his disease and brought home, he jealously goads David into cutting off a piece of Monica's hair. That night, David enters his adoptive parents' room, but as Monica turns over, the scissors accidentally poke her in the eye. While Henry attends to her wounds, Teddy picks up the lock of hair from the floor and places it in his pocket. During a pool party, one of Martin's friends pokes David with a knife, triggering his self-protection programming. David grabs Martin, causing both of them to fall into the pool. While Martin is rescued, David is accused of endangering others.
Frightful of David's reactions and fearing for his family's safety, Henry convinces Monica to return David to his creators for destruction. En route, she instead spares David by abandoning him in a forest full of scrap metal and obsolete mechas, telling him to avoid people and find solace with his own kind. Now accompanied solely by Teddy, David recalls The Adventures of Pinocchio and decides to find the Blue Fairy in the hope that she will make him a "real boy" (and therefore worthy of Monica's love).
David and Teddy are captured by the "Flesh Fair", a kind of traveling circus, in which obsolete mechas are destroyed in front of jeering crowds. About to be destroyed himself, David pleads for his life. The audience revolts, allowing David to escape with Gigolo Joe, a prostitute mecha on the run after being framed for murder. David, Teddy, and Joe go to the decadent resort town of Rouge City, where "Dr. Know", a holographic answer engine, directs them to the top of Rockefeller Center in the flooded ruins of New York City.
Above the ruins of New York, David meets Professor Hobby, his creator, who tells him that their meeting demonstrates David's ability to love and desire, as well as to pursue his dreams, like a human. David finds copies of himself, including female variants called "Darlene", ready to be shipped. Disheartened by his lost sense of individuality, David attempts suicide by falling from a skyscraper into the ocean. While underwater, he notices a figure resembling the Blue Fairy, before Joe rescues him in an amphibious aircraft. Before David can explain, authorities capture Joe with an electromagnet. David and Teddy take control of the aircraft to see the Blue Fairy, which turns out to be a statue from an attraction on Coney Island. The two become trapped when the Wonder Wheel falls on their vehicle. Believing that the Blue Fairy is real, David repeatedly asks the statue to turn him into a real boy until his power source is depleted.
Two thousand years later, humanity is extinct at least on Earth and Manhattan is buried under glacial ice. Mechas have evolved into an advanced form, and a group known as the Specialists, interested in humanity, find and resurrect David and Teddy. They reconstruct the Swinton family home from David's memories before explaining, via an interactive version of the Blue Fairy, that he cannot become human. However, they recreate Monica through genetic material from the strand of hair that Teddy kept. This version of Monica can live for only one day and cannot be revived. David spends his happiest day with Monica, and as she falls asleep in the evening, Monica tells David that she has always loved him. David lies down next to her and closes his eyes as Teddy watches over them.
Stanley Kubrick began development on an adaptation of "Super-Toys Last All Summer Long" in the late 1970s, hiring the story's author, Brian Aldiss, to write a film treatment. In 1985, Kubrick asked Steven Spielberg to direct the film, with Kubrick producing. Warner Bros. agreed to co-finance A.I. and cover distribution duties. The film labored in development hell, and Aldiss was fired by Kubrick over creative differences in 1989. Bob Shaw briefly served as writer, leaving after six weeks due to Kubrick's demanding work schedule, and Ian Watson was hired as the new writer in March 1990. Aldiss later remarked, "Not only did the bastard fire me, he hired my enemy [Watson] instead." Kubrick handed Watson Carlo Collodi's The Adventures of Pinocchio for inspiration, calling A.I. "a picaresque robot version of Pinocchio".
Three weeks later, Watson gave Kubrick his first story treatment, and concluded his work on A.I. in May 1991 with another treatment of 90 pages. Gigolo Joe was originally conceived as a G.I. mecha, but Watson suggested changing him to a male prostitute. Kubrick joked, "I guess we lost the kiddie market." Meanwhile, Kubrick dropped A.I. to work on a film adaptation of Wartime Lies, feeling computer animation was not advanced enough to create the David character. After the release of Spielberg's Jurassic Park, with its innovative CGI, it was announced in November 1993 that production of A.I. would begin in 1994. Dennis Muren and Ned Gorman, who worked on Jurassic Park, became visual effects supervisors, but Kubrick was displeased with their previsualization, and with the expense of hiring Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) and Stan Winston Studio.
"Stanley [Kubrick] showed Steven [Spielberg] 650 drawings which he had, and the script and the story, everything. Stanley said, 'Look, why don't you direct it and I'll produce it.' Steven was almost in shock."
Kubrick asked Sara Maitland to give the film mythic resonance. She recalls "He never referred to the film as 'A.I.'; he always called it 'Pinocchio.'" Kubrick's version ended the same way Spielberg's does, with advanced mechas reviving Monica, but only for a day.
In early 1994, the film was in pre-production with Christopher "Fangorn" Baker as concept artist and Sara Maitland assisting on the story, which gave it "a feminist fairy-tale focus". Maitland said that Kubrick never referred to the film as A.I., but as Pinocchio. Chris Cunningham became the new visual effects supervisor. Some of his unproduced work for A.I. can be seen on the DVD The Work of Director Chris Cunningham.
Aside from considering computer animation, Kubrick also had Joseph Mazzello do a screen test for the lead role. Cunningham helped assemble a series of "little robot-type humans" for the David character. "We tried to construct a little boy with a movable rubber face to see whether we could make it look appealing," producer Jan Harlan reflected. "But it was a total failure, it looked awful." Hans Moravec was brought in as a technical consultant. Meanwhile, Kubrick and Harlan thought that A.I. would be closer to Steven Spielberg's sensibilities as director. Kubrick handed the position to Spielberg in 1995, but Spielberg chose to direct other projects and convinced Kubrick to remain as director. The film was put on hold due to Kubrick's commitment to Eyes Wide Shut (1999).
After Kubrick's death in March 1999, Harlan and Christiane Kubrick approached Spielberg to take over the director's position. By November 1999, Spielberg was writing the screenplay based on Watson's 90-page story treatment. It was his first solo screenplay credit since Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977). Pre-production was briefly halted during February 2000 because Spielberg pondered directing other projects, which were Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, Minority Report and Memoirs of a Geisha. The following month, Spielberg announced that A.I. would be his next project, with Minority Report as a follow-up. When he decided to fast track A.I., Spielberg brought back Chris Baker as concept artist. Ian Watson reported that the final script was very faithful to Kubrick's vision; even the ending, which is often attributed to Spielberg, saying, "The final 20 minutes are pretty close to what I wrote for Stanley, and what Stanley wanted, faithfully filmed by Spielberg without added schmaltz".
The original start date was July 10, 2000, but filming was delayed until August. Aside from a couple of weeks of shooting on location in Oxbow Regional Park in Oregon, A.I. was shot entirely using sound stages at Warner Bros. Studios and the Spruce Goose Dome in Long Beach, California.
Spielberg copied Kubrick's obsessively secretive approach to filmmaking by refusing to give the complete script to cast and crew, banning press from the set, and making actors sign confidentiality agreements. For instance, Jack Angel, who voiced Teddy, recorded his lines entirely out of context, only receiving direction to sound like Eeyore from Winnie the Pooh, except "very wise and old and stoic". However, Spielberg asked Angel to be on the set every day to make line alterations wherever he felt necessary. Spielberg initially wanted to follow Kubrick's vision to have David as a robot, he hired Stan Winston to build an animatronic of David until it was dropped after Spielberg and the crew saw Osment's performance in The Sixth Sense. Social robotics expert Cynthia Breazeal served as technical consultant during production. Costume designer Bob Ringwood studied pedestrians on the Las Vegas Strip for his influence on the Rouge City extras. Visual effects, such as removing the visible rods controlling Teddy and removing Haley Joel Osment's breath, were provided in-houses by PDI/DreamWorks.
Julianne Moore and Gwyneth Paltrow were considered for the role of Monica Swinton before Frances O'Connor was cast. Jerry Seinfeld was originally considered to voice and play the Comedian Robot before Chris Rock was cast. Kathryn Morris appeared as a singer named Teenage Honey but was cut from the film.
A. O. Scott notes Spielberg's homages to Kubrick, "sly references to A Clockwork Orange, The Shining and predominantly 2001: A Space Odyssey", as well as Collodi's Pinocchio. The lines Dr. Know quotes are from W. B. Yeats's "The Stolen Child":
Come away, O human child!
To the waters and the wild
With a faery, hand in hand,
For the world’s more full of weeping
than you can understand.
— W. B. Yeats, The Stolen ChildThe film's soundtrack album was released by Warner Sunset Records in 2001. The original score was composed and conducted by John Williams, performed by the Hollywood Studio Symphony and features singers Lara Fabian on two songs and Josh Groban on one. The film's score also had a limited release as an official "For your consideration Academy Promo", as well as a complete score issued by La-La Land Records in 2015. The band Ministry appears in the film playing the song "What About Us?", but the song does not appear on the official soundtrack album.
Williams called his score an "homage a Kubrick". He includes echoes of György Ligeti's choral music, which Kubrick used in 2001: A Space Odyssey. Per Kubrick's request, Williams included a quotation of Richard Strauss's Der Rosenkavalier in his score.
The teaser trailer debuted on December 8, 2000, with the theatrical release of Proof of Life. Warner Bros. used an alternate reality game titled The Beast to promote the film. Over forty websites were created by Atomic Pictures in New York City (kept online at Cloudmakers.org), including the website for Cybertronics Corp. There were to be a series of video games for the Xbox video game console that followed the storyline of The Beast, but they went undeveloped. To avoid audiences mistaking A.I. for a family film, no action figures were created, although Hasbro released a talking Teddy following the film's release in June 2001. A.I. premiered at the Venice Film Festival in 2001.
A.I. Artificial Intelligence was released on VHS and DVD in the United States by DreamWorks Home Entertainment on March 5, 2002, in widescreen and fullscreen two-disc special editions featuring an extensive sixteen-part documentary detailing the film's development, production, visual effects, sound design and music. The bonuses also include interviews with Haley Joel Osment, Jude Law, Frances O'Connor, Steven Spielberg and John Williams, two teaser trailers for the film's original theatrical release, and an extensive photo gallery featuring production stills and Stanley Kubrick's original storyboards. It was released overseas by Warner Home Video.
The film was released on Blu-ray in Japan by Warner Home Video on December 22, 2010, followed shortly by a United States release by Paramount Home Entertainment (Paramount currently owns the pre-2010 live-action DreamWorks catalog) on April 5, 2011. This Blu-ray features the film remastered in high-definition and incorporates all the bonus features previously included on the two-disc special-edition DVD.
The film opened in 3,242 theaters in the United States and Canada on June 29, 2001, earning $29.35 million at #1 during its opening weekend. A.I. went on to gross $78.62 million in the United States and Canada. Opening on 524 screens in Japan, A.I. grossed almost two billion Yen in its first five days, the biggest June opening in Japan at the time, and sold more tickets in its opening weekend than Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace, although it grossed slightly less. It went on to gross $78 million in Japan. It grossed $157 million in other countries, for a worldwide total of $235.93 million.
On Rotten Tomatoes, A.I. Artificial Intelligence holds an approval rating of 76% based on reviews from 201 critics, with an average rating of 6.60/10. The website's critical consensus reads: "A curious, not always seamless, amalgamation of Kubrick's chilly bleakness and Spielberg's warm-hearted optimism. A.I. is, in a word, fascinating." On Metacritic, it has a weighted average score of 65 out of 100 based on reviews from 32 critics, which indicates "generally favorable reviews". Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "C+" on a scale of A+ to F.
A. O. Scott writes: "Mr. Spielberg seems to be attempting the improbable feat of melding Kubrick's chilly, analytical style with his own warmer, needier sensibility. He tells the story slowly and films it with lucid, mesmerizing objectivity, creating a mood as layered, dissonant and strange as John Williams's unusually restrained, modernist score." He concludes: "The very end somehow fuses the cathartic comfort of infantile wish fulfillment -- the dream that the first perfect love whose loss we experience as the fall from Eden might be restored -- with a feeling almost too terrible to acknowledge or to name. Refusing to cuddle us or lull us into easy sleep, Mr. Spielberg locates the unspoken moral of all our fairy tales. To be real is to be mortal; to be human is to love, to dream and to perish." Richard Corliss of Time magazine heavily praised Spielberg's direction, as well as the cast and visual effects. Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three stars out of a possible four, saying that it is "wonderful and maddening". Film critic Armond White of the New York Press praised the film, noting that "each part of David's journey through carnal and sexual universes into the final eschatological devastation becomes as profoundly philosophical and contemplative as anything by cinema's most thoughtful, speculative artists – Borzage, Ozu, Demy, Tarkovsky."
Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader compared A.I. to Solaris (1972), and praised both "Kubrick for proposing that Spielberg direct the project and Spielberg for doing his utmost to respect Kubrick's intentions while making it a profoundly personal work".
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone magazine gave a mixed review, concluding, "Spielberg cannot live up to Kubrick's darker side of the future", but still put the film on his top ten list that year. James Berardinelli found the film "consistently involving, with moments of near-brilliance, but far from a masterpiece. In fact, as the long-awaited 'collaboration' of Kubrick and Spielberg, it ranks as something of a disappointment." Of the film's highly debated finale, he claimed, "There is no doubt that the concluding 30 minutes are all Spielberg; the outstanding question is where Kubrick's vision left off and Spielberg's began." John Simon of the National Review described A.I. "as an uneasy mix of trauma and treacle".
Leonard Maltin, on the other hand, gives the film two stars out of four in his Movie Guide, writing, "[The] intriguing story draws us in, thanks in part to Osment's exceptional performance, but takes several wrong turns; ultimately, it just doesn't work. Spielberg rewrote the adaptation Stanley Kubrick commissioned of the Brian Aldiss short story Super Toys Last All Summer Long; [the] result is a curious and uncomfortable hybrid of Kubrick and Spielberg sensibilities"; However, Maltin called John Williams' music score "striking". Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle gave a largely negative review. "A.I. exhibits all its creators' bad traits and none of the good. So we end up with the structureless, meandering, slow-motion endlessness of Kubrick combined with the fuzzy, cuddly mindlessness of Spielberg." Dubbing it Spielberg's "first boring movie", LaSalle also believed that the robots at the end of the film were aliens, and compared Gigolo Joe to the "useless" Jar Jar Binks, yet praised Robin Williams for his portrayal of a futuristic Albert Einstein.[failed verification]
Filmmaker Billy Wilder hailed A.I. as "the most underrated film of the past few years". When British filmmaker Ken Russell saw the film, he wept during the ending.
Executive producer Jan Harlan stated that Kubrick "would have applauded" the final film, while Kubrick's widow Christiane also enjoyed A.I. Aldiss admired the film as well: "I thought what an inventive, intriguing, ingenious, involving film this was. There are flaws in it and I suppose I might have a personal quibble but it's so long since I wrote it." Of the film's ending, he wondered how it might have been had Kubrick directed the film: "That is one of the 'ifs' of film history—at least the ending indicates Spielberg adding some sugar to Kubrick's wine. The actual ending is overly sympathetic and moreover rather overtly engineered by a plot device that does not really bear credence. But it's a brilliant piece of film and of course it's a phenomenon because it contains the energies and talents of two brilliant filmmakers."
Watson has speculated, "Worldwide, A.I. was very successful (and the 4th-highest earner of the year) but it didn't do quite so well in America, because the film, so I'm told, was too poetical and intellectual in general for American tastes. Plus, quite a few critics in America misunderstood the film, thinking for instance that the Giacometti-style beings in the final 20 minutes were aliens (whereas they were robots of the future who had evolved themselves from the robots in the earlier part of the film) and also thinking that the final 20 minutes were a sentimental addition by Spielberg, whereas those scenes were exactly what I wrote for Stanley and exactly what he wanted, filmed faithfully by Spielberg."[b]
Spielberg responded to some of the criticisms of the film, stating that many of the "so called sentimental" elements of A.I., including the ending, were in fact Kubrick's, and the darker elements were his own. However, Sara Maitland, who worked on the project with Kubrick in the 1990s, said that Kubrick never started production on A.I. because he had a hard time making the ending work.
In 2002, Spielberg told film critic Joe Leydon:
"People pretend to think they know Stanley Kubrick, and think they know me, when most of them don't know either of us... And what's really funny about that is, all the parts of A.I. that people assume were Stanley's were mine. And all the parts of A.I. that people accuse me of sweetening and softening and sentimentalizing were all Stanley's. The teddy bear was Stanley's. The whole last 20 minutes of the movie was completely Stanley's. The whole first 35, 40 minutes of the film—all the stuff in the house—was word for word, from Stanley's screenplay. This was Stanley's vision... Eighty percent of the critics got it all mixed up. But I could see why. Because, obviously, I've done a lot of movies where people have cried and have been sentimental. And I've been accused of sentimentalizing hard-core material. But in fact it was Stanley who did the sweetest parts of A.I., not me. I'm the guy who did the dark center of the movie, with the Flesh Fair and everything else. That's why he wanted me to make the movie in the first place. He said, 'This is much closer to your sensibilities than my own.'" Spielberg said, "While there was divisiveness when A.I. came out, I felt that I had achieved Stanley's wishes, or goals."In 2009, Jonathan Rosenbaum described A.I. as "a very great and deeply misunderstood film", noting that Andrew Sarris, Stan Brakhage and James Naremore "more or less" agreed with this assessment. A decade after his initial review, Roger Ebert gave the film a full four stars and added it to his "Great Movies" canon in 2011.
On re-watching the film many years after its release, BBC film critic Mark Kermode apologized to Spielberg in a January 2013 interview for "getting it wrong" on the film when he first viewed it in 2001. He came to believe that the film is Spielberg's "enduring masterpiece".
In July 2025, it was one of the films voted for the "Readers' Choice" edition of The New York Times' list of "The 100 Best Movies of the 21st Century," finishing at number 258. That same month, it ranked number 61 on Rolling Stone's list of "The 100 Best Movies of the 21st Century."
Visual effects supervisors Dennis Muren, Stan Winston, Michael Lantieri and Scott Farrar were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects, and John Williams was nominated for Best Original Music Score. Steven Spielberg, Jude Law and Williams received nominations at the 59th Golden Globe Awards. A.I. was successful at the Saturn Awards, winning five awards, including Best Science Fiction Film along with Best Writing for Spielberg and Best Performance by a Younger Actor for Osment.
American Film Institute nominated the film in AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores.
The history of artificial intelligence (AI) began in antiquity, with myths, stories, and rumors of artificial beings endowed with intelligence by master craftsmen.[citation needed]
The field of research that eventually evolved into what is widely described as artifical intelligence was founded at a workshop held on the campus of Dartmouth College in 1956. At the workshop, a concept of the first AI program, Logic Theorist, was presented by future Turing Awardee Allen Newell and future Nobel Laureate Herbert A. Simon, with help from J. C. Shaw. The software architecture of this program differed from modern AI systems in that it was a hand-written fixed script. Attendees of the workshop became the leaders of AI research for decades. Many of them predicted that machines as intelligent as humans would exist within a generation. Despite the eventual success of its attendees and the field as a whole, the workshop was considered a failure. "When the workshop failed to deliver, AI was dismissed as a pipe dream and research funding dried up".
It became apparent that researchers had underestimated the complexity of this objective. In 1974, criticism from James Lighthill and pressure from the U.S. Congress led the U.S. and British Governments to stop funding undirected research into artificial intelligence. Seven years later, a visionary initiative by the Japanese Government and the success of expert systems  reinvigorated investment in AI, and by the late 1980s, the industry had grown into a billion-dollar enterprise. However, investors' enthusiasm waned in the 1990s, and the field was criticized in the press and avoided by industry (a period known as an "AI winter"). Nevertheless, research and funding continued to grow under other names.
In the early 2000s, machine learning was applied to a wide range of problems in academia and industry. The success was attributable to the availability of powerful computer hardware, the accumulation of expansive data sets, and the application of rigorous mathematical methods. Soon after, deep learning proved to be a breakthrough technology, eclipsing all other methods. The transformer architecture, introduced in 2017, and was utilized to produce generative AI applications, among other implementation.
Investment in AI boomed in the 2020s. The AI boom, initiated by the development of transformer architecture, led to the rapid scaling and public releases of large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT  and Claude (AI). These models exhibit human-like traits of knowledge, attention, and creativity, and have been integrated into various sectors, fueling exponential investment in AI. However, concerns about the potential risks and ethical implications of advanced AI have also emerged, causing debate about the future of AI and its impact on society.
Mechanical men and artificial beings appear in Greek myths, such as the golden robots of Hephaestus, the bronze giant Talos and Pygmalion's Galatea. In the Middle Ages, there were rumors of secret mystical or alchemical means of placing mind into matter, such as Jabir ibn Hayyan's Takwin, Paracelsus' homunculus, Rabbi Judah Loew's Golem and Roger Bacon's brazen head. By the 19th century, ideas about artificial men and thinking machines became a popular theme in fiction. Notable works include Mary Shelley's Frankenstein (1818),  Johann Wolfgang von Goethe's, Faust, Part Two (1832), and Karel Čapek's R.U.R. (Rossum's Universal Robots) (1921). Stories of these creatures and their fates consider many of the same hopes, fears and ethical concerns that are presented by modern artificial intelligence. Issues relevant to AI were also discussed in speculative essays such as Samuel Butler's "Darwin among the Machines" (1863).
Realistic humanoid automata were built by craftsmen from many civilizations, including Yan Shi, Hero of Alexandria, Al-Jazari, Haroun al-Rashid, Jacques de Vaucanson, Leonardo Torres y Quevedo, Pierre Jaquet-Droz and Wolfgang von Kempelen. The oldest known automata were sacred statues of ancient Egypt and Greece. The faithful believed that craftsman had imbued these figures with very real minds, capable of wisdom and emotion—Hermes Trismegistus wrote that "by discovering the true nature of the gods, man has been able to reproduce it".
Artificial intelligence is based on the assumption that the process of human thought can be mechanized. Chinese, Indian and Greek philosophers developed structured methods of formal reasoning by the first millennium BCE. Formal logic was invented and improved by Greek, Islamic and European philosophers, such as Aristotle, Euclid, Al-Khwarizmi, Duns Scotus and René Descartes.
Spanish philosopher Ramon Llull (1232–1315) developed several logical machines devoted to the production of knowledge by logical means; Llull described his machines as mechanical entities that could combine basic and undeniable truths by simple logical operations, produced by the machine by mechanical meanings, in such ways as to produce all the possible knowledge. Llull's work had a great influence on Gottfried Leibniz, who redeveloped his ideas.
In the 17th century, Leibniz, Thomas Hobbes and René Descartes explored the possibility that all rational thought could be made as systematic as algebra or geometry. Hobbes wrote in Leviathan: "For reason ... is nothing but reckoning, that is adding and subtracting". Leibniz described a universal language of reasoning, the characteristica universalis, which would reduce argumentation to calculation so that "there would be no more need of disputation between two philosophers than between two accountants. For it would suffice to take their pencils in hand, down to their slates, and to say to each other (with a friend as witness, if they liked): Let us calculate."
Boole's The Laws of Thought (1854) and Frege's Begriffsschrift (1879) defined the modern form of symbolic mathematical logic. Building on Frege's system, Russell and Whitehead presented a formal treatment of the foundations of arithmetic in the Principia Mathematica in 1913. Inspired by their success, David Hilbert challenged mathematicians of the 1920s and 30s to formalize all mathematical reasoning. In response, Gödel's incompleteness proof, Turing's machine and Church's Lambda calculus[a] showed that there were, in fact, limits to what formal mathematics could do. 
However, within these limits, the Church-Turing thesis implied that a mechanical device, shuffling symbols as simple as 0 and 1, could imitate any conceivable process of mathematical reasoning or problem solving. The key insight was the Turing machine—a simple theoretical construct that captured the essence of abstract symbol manipulation. This device and the ideas behind it would inspire engineers and mathematicians of the 1940s to build machines that could theoretically carry out any form of formal reasoning or problem solving.
Calculating machines were designed or built in antiquity and throughout history by many people, including Gottfried Leibniz, Joseph Marie Jacquard, Charles Babbage, Percy Ludgate, Leonardo Torres Quevedo, Vannevar Bush, and others. Ada Lovelace speculated that Babbage's machine was "a thinking or ... reasoning machine", but warned "It is desirable to guard against the possibility of exaggerated ideas that arise as to the powers" of the machine.
The first modern computers were the massive machines of the Second World War (such as Konrad Zuse's Z3, Tommy Flowers' Heath Robinson and Colossus, Atanasoff and Berry's ABC, and ENIAC at the University of Pennsylvania). ENIAC was based on the theoretical foundation laid by Alan Turing and developed by John von Neumann, and proved to be the most influential.
The earliest research into thinking machines was inspired by a confluence of ideas that became prevalent in the late 1930s, 1940s, and early 1950s. Recent research in neurology had shown that the brain was an electrical network of neurons that fired in all-or-nothing pulses. Norbert Wiener's cybernetics described control and stability in electrical networks. Claude Shannon's information theory described digital signals (i.e., all-or-nothing signals). Alan Turing's theory of computation showed that any form of computation could be described digitally. The close relationship between these ideas suggested that it might be possible to construct an "electronic brain".
In the 1940s and 50s, a handful of scientists from a variety of fields (mathematics, psychology, engineering, economics and political science) explored several research directions that would be vital to later AI research. Alan Turing was among the first people to seriously investigate the theoretical possibility of "machine intelligence". The field of "artificial intelligence research" was founded as an academic discipline in 1956.
In 1950, Turing published a landmark paper, "Computing Machinery and Intelligence", in which he speculated about the possibility of creating machines that think.[b] In the paper, he noted that "thinking" is difficult to define and devised his famous Turing test: If a machine could carry on a conversation (over a teleprinter) that was indistinguishable from a conversation with a human being, then it was reasonable to say that the machine was "thinking". This simplified version of the problem allowed Turing to argue convincingly that a "thinking machine" was at least plausible and the paper answered all the most common objections to the proposition. The Turing test was the first serious proposal in the philosophy of artificial intelligence.
Walter Pitts and Warren McCulloch analyzed networks of idealized artificial neurons and showed how they might perform simple logical functions in 1943. They were the first to describe what later researchers would call a neural network. The paper was influenced by Turing's paper "On Computable Numbers" from 1936, using similar two-state boolean 'neurons', but was the first to apply it to neuronal function. One of the students inspired by Pitts and McCulloch was Marvin Minsky who was a 24-year-old graduate student at the time. In 1951, Minsky and Dean Edmonds built the first neural net machine, the SNARC. Minsky would later become one of the most important leaders and innovators in Artificial Intelligence.
Experimental robots such as William Grey Walter's turtles and the Johns Hopkins Beast, were built in the 1950s. These machines did not use computers, digital electronics, or symbolic reasoning; they were controlled entirely by analog circuitry.
In 1951, using the Ferranti Mark 1 machine of the University of Manchester, Christopher Strachey wrote a checkers program and Dietrich Prinz wrote one for chess. Arthur Samuel's checkers program, the subject of his 1959 paper "Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the Game of Checkers", eventually achieved sufficient skill to challenge a respectable amateur. Samuel's program was among the first uses of what would later be called machine learning. Game AI would continue to be used as a measure of progress in AI throughout its history.
When access to digital computers became possible in the mid-fifties, a few scientists instinctively recognized that a machine that could manipulate numbers could also manipulate symbols and that the manipulation of symbols could well be the essence of human thought. This was a new approach to creating thinking machines.
In 1955, Allen Newell and future Nobel Laureate Herbert A. Simon created the "Logic Theorist", with help from J. C. Shaw. The program would eventually prove 38 of the first 52 theorems in Russell and Whitehead's Principia Mathematica, and find new and more elegant proofs for some. Simon said that they had "solved the venerable mind/body problem, explaining how a system composed of matter can have the properties of mind."[c] The symbolic reasoning paradigm they introduced would dominate AI research and funding until the mid-90s, as well as inspire the cognitive revolution.
The Dartmouth workshop of 1956 was a pivotal event that marked the formal inception of AI as an academic discipline. It was organized by Marvin Minsky and John McCarthy, with the support of two senior scientists Claude Shannon and Nathan Rochester of IBM. The proposal for the conference stated they intended to test the assertion that "every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence can be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it".[d] The term "Artificial Intelligence" was introduced by John McCarthy at the workshop.[e]
The participants included Ray Solomonoff, Oliver Selfridge, Trenchard More, Arthur Samuel, Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon, all of whom would create important programs during the first decades of AI research.[f] At the workshop, Newell and Simon debuted the "Logic Theorist". The workshop was the moment that AI gained its name, its mission, its first major success and its key players, and is widely considered the birth of AI.[g]
In the autumn of 1956, Newell and Simon also presented the Logic Theorist at a meeting of the Special Interest Group in Information Theory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). At the same meeting, Noam Chomsky discussed his generative grammar, and George Miller described his landmark paper "The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two". Miller wrote "I left the symposium with a conviction, more intuitive than rational, that experimental psychology, theoretical linguistics, and the computer simulation of cognitive processes were all pieces from a larger whole."
This meeting was the beginning of the "cognitive revolution"—an interdisciplinary paradigm shift in psychology, philosophy, computer science and neuroscience. It inspired the creation of the sub-fields of symbolic artificial intelligence, generative linguistics, cognitive science, cognitive psychology, cognitive neuroscience and the philosophical schools of computationalism and functionalism. All these fields used related tools to model the mind and results discovered in one field were relevant to the others.
The cognitive approach allowed researchers to consider "mental objects" like thoughts, plans, goals, facts or memories, often analyzed using high level symbols in functional networks. These objects had been forbidden as "unobservable" by earlier paradigms such as behaviorism and positivism.[h] Symbolic mental objects would become the major focus of AI research and funding for the next several decades.
The programs developed in the years after the Dartmouth Workshop were, to most people, simply "astonishing":[i] computers were solving algebra word problems, proving theorems in geometry and learning to speak English. Few at the time would have believed that such "intelligent" behavior by machines was possible at all. Researchers expressed an intense optimism in private and in print, predicting that a fully intelligent machine would be built in less than 20 years. Government agencies like the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA, then known as "ARPA") poured money into the field. Artificial Intelligence laboratories were set up at many British and US universities in the latter 1950s and early 1960s.
There were many successful programs and new directions in the late 50s and 1960s. Some of the most influential included:
Many early AI programs used the same basic algorithm. To achieve some goal (like winning a game or proving a theorem), they proceeded step by step towards it (by making a move or a deduction) as if searching through a maze, backtracking whenever they reached a dead end. The principal difficulty was that, for many problems, the number of possible paths through the "maze" was astronomical (a situation known as a "combinatorial explosion"). Researchers would reduce the search space by using heuristics that would eliminate paths that were unlikely to lead to a solution.
Newell and Simon tried to capture a general version of this algorithm in a program called the "General Problem Solver". Other "searching" programs accomplished impressive results like solving problems in geometry and algebra, such as Herbert Gelernter's Geometry Theorem Prover (1958) and Symbolic Automatic Integrator (SAINT), written by Minsky's student James Slagle in 1961. Other programs searched through goals and subgoals to plan actions, like the STRIPS system developed at Stanford to control the behavior of the robot Shakey.
An important goal of AI research is to allow computers to communicate in natural languages like English. An early success was Daniel Bobrow's program STUDENT, which could solve high-school algebra word-problems.
A semantic net represents concepts (e.g., "house", "door") as nodes, and relations among concepts as links between the nodes (e.g. "has-a"). Ross Quillian wrote the first AI program to use a semantic net, and the most successful (and controversial) version was Roger Schank's Conceptual dependency theory.
Joseph Weizenbaum's ELIZA could carry out conversations that were so realistic that users occasionally were fooled into thinking they were communicating with a human being and not with a computer program (see ELIZA effect). But in fact, ELIZA simply gave a canned response or repeated back what was said to it, rephrasing its response with a few grammar-rules. ELIZA was the first chatbot.
In the late 60s, Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert of the MIT AI Laboratory proposed that AI research should focus on artificially simple situations known as micro-worlds.[j] They pointed out that in successful sciences like physics, basic principles were often best understood using simplified models like frictionless planes or perfectly rigid bodies. Much of the research focused on a "blocks world", which consists of colored blocks of various shapes and sizes arrayed on a flat surface.
This paradigm led to innovative work in machine vision by Gerald Sussman, Adolfo Guzman, David Waltz (who invented "constraint propagation"), and especially Patrick Winston. At the same time, Minsky and Papert built a robot arm that could stack blocks, bringing the blocks world to life. Terry Winograd's SHRDLU could communicate in ordinary English sentences about the micro-world, plan operations and execute them.
In the 1960s, research-funders primarily supported laboratories researching symbolic AI, however, a few laboratories pursued research in neural networks.
The perceptron, a single-layer neural network was introduced in 1958 by Frank Rosenblatt (who had been a schoolmate of Marvin Minsky at the Bronx High School of Science). Like most AI researchers, he was optimistic about their power, predicting that a perceptron "may eventually be able to learn, make decisions, and translate languages". Rosenblatt was primarily funded by the Office of Naval Research.
Bernard Widrow and his student Ted Hoff built ADALINE (1960) and MADALINE (1962), which had up to 1000 adjustable weights. A group at Stanford Research Institute led by Charles A. Rosen and Alfred E. (Ted) Brain built two neural-network machines named MINOS I (1960) and II (1963), mainly funded by the U.S. Army Signal Corps. MINOS II had 6600 adjustable weights, and was controlled with an SDS 910 computer in a configuration named MINOS III (1968), which could classify symbols on army maps, and recognize hand-printed characters on Fortran coding sheets. Most of neural-network research during this early period involved building and using bespoke hardware, rather than simulation on digital computers.[k]
However, partly due to lack of results and partly due to competition from symbolic AI research, the MINOS project ran out of funding in 1966. Rosenblatt failed to secure continued funding in the 1960s. In 1969, research came to a sudden halt with the publication of Minsky and Papert's 1969 book  Perceptrons. It suggested that there were severe limitations to what perceptrons could do and that Rosenblatt's predictions had been grossly exaggerated. The effect of the book was that virtually no research was funded in connectionism for 10 years. The competition for government funding ended with the victory of symbolic AI approaches over neural networks.
Minsky (who had worked on SNARC) became a staunch objector to pure connectionist AI. Widrow (who had worked on ADALINE) turned to adaptive signal processing. The SRI group (which worked on MINOS) turned to symbolic AI and robotics.
The main problem was the inability to train multilayered networks (versions of backpropagation had already been used in other fields, but it was unknown to these researchers). The AI community became aware of backpropagation in the 1980s, and, in the 21st century, neural networks would become enormously successful, fulfilling all of Rosenblatt's optimistic predictions. Rosenblatt did not live to see this, however, as he died in a boating accident in 1971.
The first generation of AI researchers made the following predictions about their work:
In June 1963, MIT received a $2.2 million grant from the newly formed Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA, later known as DARPA). The money was used to fund project MAC which subsumed the "AI Group" founded by Minsky and McCarthy five years earlier. DARPA continued to provide $3 million each year until the 1970s. DARPA made similar grants to Newell and Simon's program at Carnegie Mellon University and to Stanford University's AI Lab, founded by John McCarthy in 1963. Another important AI laboratory was established at Edinburgh University by Donald Michie in 1965. These four institutions would continue to be the main centers of AI research and funding in academia for many years.[m]
The money was given with few strings attached: J. C. R. Licklider, then the director of ARPA, believed that his organization should "fund people, not projects!" and allowed researchers to pursue whatever directions might interest them. This created a freewheeling atmosphere at MIT that gave birth to the hacker culture, but this "hands off" approach did not last.
In the 1970s, AI was subject to critiques and financial setbacks. AI researchers had failed to appreciate the difficulty of the problems they faced. Their tremendous optimism had raised public expectations impossibly high, and when the promised results failed to materialize, funding targeted at AI was severely reduced. The lack of success indicated that the techniques being used by AI researchers at the time were insufficient to achieve their goals.
These setbacks did not affect the growth and progress of the field, however. The funding cuts only impacted a handful of major laboratories and the critiques were largely ignored. General public interest in the field continued to grow, the number of researchers increased dramatically, and new ideas were explored in logic programming, commonsense reasoning and many other areas. Historian Thomas Haigh argued in 2023 that there was no winter, and AI researcher Nils Nilsson described this period as the most "exciting" time to work in AI.
In the early seventies, the capabilities of AI programs were limited. Even the most impressive could only handle trivial versions of the problems they were supposed to solve;[n] all the programs were, in some sense, "toys". AI researchers had begun to run into several limits that would be only conquered decades later, and others that still stymie the field in the 2020s:
The agencies that funded AI research, such as the British government, DARPA and the National Research Council (NRC) became frustrated with the lack of progress and eventually cut off almost all funding for undirected AI research. The pattern began in 1966 when the Automatic Language Processing Advisory Committee (ALPAC) report criticized machine translation efforts. After spending $20 million, the NRC ended all support. In 1973, the Lighthill report on the state of AI research in the UK criticized the failure of AI to achieve its "grandiose objectives" and led to the dismantling of AI research in that country. (The report specifically mentioned the combinatorial explosion problem as a reason for AI's failings.)[s] DARPA was deeply disappointed with researchers working on the Speech Understanding Research program at CMU and canceled an annual grant of $3 million.[t]
Hans Moravec blamed the crisis on the unrealistic predictions of his colleagues. "Many researchers were caught up in a web of increasing exaggeration."[u] However, there was another issue: since the passage of the Mansfield Amendment in 1969, DARPA had been under increasing pressure to fund "mission-oriented direct research, rather than basic undirected research". Funding for the creative, freewheeling exploration that had gone on in the 60s would not come from DARPA, which instead directed money at specific projects with clear objectives, such as autonomous tanks and battle management systems.[v]
The major laboratories (MIT, Stanford, CMU and Edinburgh) had been receiving generous support from their governments, and when it was withdrawn, these were the only places that were seriously impacted by the budget cuts. The thousands of researchers outside these institutions and the many thousands that were joining the field were unaffected.
Several philosophers had strong objections to the claims being made by AI researchers. One of the earliest was John Lucas, who argued that Gödel's incompleteness theorem showed that a formal system (such as a computer program) could never see the truth of certain statements, while a human being could. Hubert Dreyfus ridiculed the broken promises of the 1960s and critiqued the assumptions of AI, arguing that human reasoning actually involved very little "symbol processing" and a great deal of embodied, instinctive, unconscious "know how".[w] John Searle's Chinese Room argument, presented in 1980, attempted to show that a program could not be said to "understand" the symbols that it uses (a quality called "intentionality"). If the symbols have no meaning for the machine, Searle argued, then the machine can not be described as "thinking".
These critiques were not taken seriously by AI researchers. Problems like intractability and commonsense knowledge seemed much more immediate and serious. It was unclear what difference "know how" or "intentionality" made to an actual computer program. MIT's Minsky said of Dreyfus and Searle, "they misunderstand, and should be ignored." Dreyfus, who also taught at MIT, was given a cold shoulder: he later said that AI researchers "dared not be seen having lunch with me." Joseph Weizenbaum, the author of ELIZA, was also an outspoken critic of Dreyfus' positions, but he "deliberately made it plain that [his AI colleagues' treatment of Dreyfus] was not the way to treat a human being,"[x] and was unprofessional and childish.
Weizenbaum began to have serious ethical doubts about AI when Kenneth Colby wrote a "computer program which can conduct psychotherapeutic dialogue" based on ELIZA.[y] Weizenbaum was disturbed that Colby saw a mindless program as a serious therapeutic tool. A feud began, and the situation was not helped when Colby did not credit Weizenbaum for his contribution to the program. In 1976, Weizenbaum published Computer Power and Human Reason which argued that the misuse of artificial intelligence has the potential to devalue human life.
Logic was introduced into AI research as early as 1958, by John McCarthy in his Advice Taker proposal. In 1963, J. Alan Robinson had discovered a simple method to implement deduction on computers, the resolution and unification algorithms. However, straightforward implementations, like those attempted by McCarthy and his students in the late 1960s, were especially intractable: the programs required astronomical numbers of steps to prove simple theorems. A more fruitful approach to logic was developed in the 1970s by Robert Kowalski at the University of Edinburgh, and soon this led to the collaboration with French researchers Alain Colmerauer and Philippe Roussel [fr] who created the successful logic programming language Prolog. Prolog uses a subset of logic (Horn clauses, closely related to "rules" and "production rules") that permits tractable computation. Rules would continue to be influential, providing a foundation for Edward Feigenbaum's expert systems and the continuing work by Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon that would lead to Soar and their unified theories of cognition.
Critics of the logical approach noted, as Dreyfus had, that human beings rarely used logic when they solved problems. Experiments by psychologists like Peter Wason, Eleanor Rosch, Amos Tversky, Daniel Kahneman and others provided proof.[z] McCarthy responded that what people do is irrelevant. He argued that what is really needed are machines that can solve problems—not machines that think as people do.[aa]
Among the critics of McCarthy's approach were his colleagues across the country at MIT. Marvin Minsky, Seymour Papert and Roger Schank were trying to solve problems like "story understanding" and "object recognition" that required a machine to think like a person. To use ordinary concepts like "chair" or "restaurant" they had to make all the same illogical assumptions that people normally made. Unfortunately, imprecise concepts like these are hard to represent in logic. MIT chose instead to focus on writing programs that solved a given task without using high-level abstract definitions or general theories of cognition, and measured performance by iterative testing, rather than arguments from first principles. Schank described their "anti-logic" approaches as "scruffy", as opposed to the "neat" paradigm used by McCarthy, Kowalski, Feigenbaum, Newell and Simon.[ab]
In 1975, in a seminal paper, Minsky noted that many of his fellow researchers were using the same kind of tool: a framework that captures all our common sense assumptions about something. For example, if we use the concept of a bird, there is a constellation of facts that immediately come to mind: we might assume that it flies, eats worms and so on (none of which are true for all birds). Minsky associated these assumptions with the general category and they could be inherited by the frames for subcategories and individuals, or over-ridden as necessary. He called these structures frames. Schank used a version of frames he called "scripts" to successfully answer questions about short stories in English. Frames would eventually be widely used in software engineering under the name object-oriented programming.
The logicians rose to the challenge. Pat Hayes claimed that "most of 'frames' is just a new syntax for parts of first-order logic." But he noted that "there are one or two apparently minor details which give a lot of trouble, however, especially defaults".
Ray Reiter admitted that "conventional logics, such as first-order logic, lack the expressive power to adequately represent the knowledge required for reasoning by default". He proposed augmenting first-order logic with a closed world assumption that a conclusion holds (by default) if its contrary cannot be shown. He showed how such an assumption corresponds to the common-sense assumption made in reasoning with frames. He also showed that it has its "procedural equivalent" as negation as failure in Prolog. The closed world assumption, as formulated by Reiter, "is not a first-order notion. (It is a meta notion.)" However, Keith Clark showed that negation as finite failure can be understood as reasoning implicitly with definitions in first-order logic including a unique name assumption that different terms denote different individuals.
During the late 1970s and throughout the 1980s, a variety of logics and extensions of first-order logic were developed both for negation as failure in logic programming and for default reasoning more generally. Collectively, these logics have become known as non-monotonic logics.
In the 1980s, a form of AI program called "expert systems" was adopted by corporations around the world and knowledge became the focus of mainstream AI research. Governments provided substantial funding, such as Japan's fifth generation computer project and the U.S. Strategic Computing Initiative. "Overall, the AI industry boomed from a few million dollars in 1980 to billions of dollars in 1988."
An expert system is a program that answers questions or solves problems about a specific domain of knowledge, using logical rules that are derived from the knowledge of experts.
The earliest examples were developed by Edward Feigenbaum and his students. Dendral, begun in 1965, identified compounds from spectrometer readings. MYCIN, developed in 1972, diagnosed infectious blood diseases. They demonstrated the feasibility of the approach.
Expert systems restricted themselves to a small domain of specific knowledge (thus avoiding the commonsense knowledge problem) and their simple design made it relatively easy for programs to be built and then modified once they were in place. All in all, the programs proved to be useful: something that AI had not been able to achieve up to this point.
In 1980, an expert system called R1 was completed at CMU for the Digital Equipment Corporation. It was an enormous success: it was saving the company 40 million dollars annually by 1986. Corporations around the world began to develop and deploy expert systems and by 1985, they were spending over a billion dollars on AI, most of it in in-house AI departments. An industry grew up to support them, including hardware companies like Symbolics and Lisp Machines and software companies such as IntelliCorp and Aion.
In 1981, the Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry set aside $850 million for the Fifth generation computer project. Their objectives were to write programs and build machines that could carry on conversations, translate languages, interpret pictures, and reason like human beings. Much to the chagrin of scruffies, they initially chose Prolog as the primary computer language for the project.
Other countries responded with new programs of their own. The UK began the £350 million Alvey project. A consortium of American companies formed the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation (or "MCC") to fund large-scale projects in AI and information technology. DARPA responded as well, founding the Strategic Computing Initiative and tripling its investment in AI between 1984 and 1988.
The power of expert systems came from the expert knowledge they contained. They were part of a new direction in AI research that had been gaining ground throughout the 70s. "AI researchers were beginning to suspect—reluctantly, for it violated the scientific canon of parsimony—that intelligence might very well be based on the ability to use large amounts of diverse knowledge in different ways," writes Pamela McCorduck. "[T]he great lesson from the 1970s was that intelligent behavior depended very much on dealing with knowledge, sometimes quite detailed knowledge, of a domain where a given task lay". Knowledge based systems and knowledge engineering became a major focus of AI research in the 1980s. It was hoped that vast databases would solve the commonsense knowledge problem and provide the support that commonsense reasoning required.
In the 1980s, some researchers attempted to attack the commonsense knowledge problem directly, by creating a massive database that would contain all the mundane facts that the average person knows. Douglas Lenat, who started a database called Cyc, argued that there is no shortcut―the only way for machines to know the meaning of human concepts is to teach them, one concept at a time, by hand.
Although symbolic knowledge representation and logical reasoning produced useful applications in the 80s and received massive amounts of funding, it was still unable to solve problems in perception, robotics, learning and common sense. A small number of scientists and engineers began to doubt that the symbolic approach would ever be sufficient for these tasks and developed other approaches, such as "connectionism", "soft" computing and reinforcement learning. Nils Nilsson called these approaches "sub-symbolic".
In 1982, physicist John Hopfield was able to prove that a form of neural network (now called a "Hopfield net") could learn and process information, and provably converges after enough time under any fixed condition. It was a breakthrough, as it was previously thought that nonlinear networks would, in general, evolve chaotically. Geoffrey Hinton proved a similar result about a device called a "Boltzmann machine". (Hopfield and Hinton would eventually receive the 2024 Nobel prize for this work.) In 1986, Hinton and David Rumelhart popularized a method for training neural networks called "backpropagation".[ac] These three developments helped to revive the exploration of artificial neural networks.
Neural networks, along with several other similar models, received widespread attention after the 1986 publication of the Parallel Distributed Processing, a two-volume collection of papers edited by Rumelhart and psychologist James McClelland. The new field was named "connectionism" which was contrasted with symbolic AI. Hinton called symbols the "luminous aether of AI"―that is, an unworkable and misleading model of intelligence.
In 1990, Yann LeCun at Bell Labs used convolutional neural networks to recognize handwritten digits. The system was used widely in the 90s, reading zip codes and personal checks. This was the first genuinely useful application of neural networks.
Rodney Brooks, Hans Moravec and others argued that, to show real intelligence, a machine needs to have a body—it needs to perceive, move, survive, and deal with the world. Sensorimotor skills are essential to higher level skills such as commonsense reasoning. They can't be efficiently implemented using abstract symbolic reasoning, so AI should solve the problems of perception, mobility, manipulation and survival without using symbolic representation at all. These robotics researchers advocated building intelligence "from the bottom up".[ad]
A precursor to this idea was David Marr, who had come to MIT in the late 1970s from a successful background in theoretical neuroscience to lead the group studying vision. He rejected all symbolic approaches (both McCarthy's logic and Minsky's frames), arguing that AI needed to understand the physical machinery of vision from the bottom up before any symbolic processing took place. (Marr's work would be cut short by leukemia in 1980.)
In his 1990 paper "Elephants Don't Play Chess", robotics researcher Brooks took direct aim at the physical symbol system hypothesis, arguing that symbols are not always necessary since "the world is its own best model. It is always exactly up to date. It always has every detail there is to be known. The trick is to sense it appropriately and often enough."
In the 1980s and 1990s, many cognitive scientists also rejected the symbol processing model of the mind and argued that the body was essential for reasoning, a theory called the "embodied mind thesis".
Soft computing uses methods that work with incomplete and imprecise information. They do not attempt to give precise, logical answers, but give results that are only "probably" correct. This allowed them to solve problems that precise symbolic methods could not handle. Press accounts often claimed these tools could "think like a human".
Judea Pearl's Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference, an influential 1988 book brought probability and decision theory into AI. Fuzzy logic, developed by Lofti Zadeh in the 60s, began to be more widely used in AI and robotics. Evolutionary computation and artificial neural networks also handle imprecise information, and are classified as "soft". In the 90s and early 2000s many other soft computing tools were developed and put into use, including Bayesian networks, hidden Markov models, information theory, and stochastic modeling. These tools, in turn depended on advanced mathematical techniques such as classical optimization. For a time in the 1990s and early 2000s, these soft tools were studied by a subfield of AI called "computational intelligence".
Reinforcement learning rewards an agent every time it performs a desired action well, and may give negative rewards (or "punishments") when it performs poorly. It was described in the first half of the twentieth century by psychologists using animal models, such as Thorndike, Pavlov and Skinner. In the 1950s, Alan Turing and Arthur Samuel foresaw the role of reinforcement learning in AI.
A successful and influential research program was led by Richard Sutton and Andrew Barto beginning in 1972. Their collaboration revolutionized the study of reinforcement learning and decision making over the past four decades. In 1988, Sutton described machine learning in terms of decision theory (i.e., the Markov decision process). This gave the subject a solid theoretical foundation and access to a large body of theoretical results developed in the field of operations research.
Also in 1988, Sutton and Barto developed the "temporal difference" (TD) learning algorithm, where the agent is rewarded only when its predictions  show improvement. It significantly outperformed previous algorithms. TD-learning was used by Gerald Tesauro in 1992 in the program TD-Gammon, which played backgammon as well as the best human players. The program learned the game by playing against itself with zero prior knowledge. In an interesting case of interdisciplinary convergence, neurologists discovered in 1997 that the dopamine reward system in brains also uses a version of the TD-learning algorithm. TD learning would be become highly influential in the 21st century, used in both AlphaGo and AlphaZero.
The business community's fascination with AI rose and fell in the 1980s in the classic pattern of an economic bubble. As dozens of companies failed, the perception in the business world was that the technology was not viable. The damage to AI's reputation would last into the 21st century. Inside the field, there was little agreement on the reasons for AI's failure to fulfill the dream of human-level intelligence that had captured the imagination of the world in the 1960s. Together, all these factors helped to fragment AI into competing subfields focused on particular problems or approaches, sometimes even under new names that disguised the tarnished pedigree of "artificial intelligence".
Over the next 20 years, AI consistently delivered working solutions to specific isolated problems. By the late 1990s, it was being used throughout the technology industry, although somewhat behind the scenes. The success was due to increasing computer power, by collaboration with other fields (such as mathematical optimization and statistics) and using higher standards of scientific accountability.
The term "AI winter" was coined by researchers who had survived the funding cuts of 1974 and had become concerned that enthusiasm for expert systems had spiraled out of control and that disappointment would certainly follow.[ae] Their fears were well founded: in the late 1980s and early 1990s, AI suffered a series of financial setbacks.
The first indication of a change in weather was the sudden collapse of the market for specialized AI hardware in 1987. Desktop computers from Apple and IBM had been steadily gaining speed and power and in 1987, they became more powerful than the more expensive Lisp machines made by Symbolics and others. There was no longer a good reason to buy them. An entire industry worth half a billion dollars was demolished overnight.
Eventually, the earliest successful expert systems, such as R1, proved too expensive to maintain. They were difficult to update, they could not learn, and they were "brittle" (i.e., they could make grotesque mistakes when given unusual inputs). Expert systems proved useful, but only in a few special contexts.
In the late 1980s, the Strategic Computing Initiative cut funding to AI "deeply and brutally". New leadership at DARPA had decided that AI was not "the next wave" and directed funds towards projects that seemed more likely to produce immediate results.
By 1991, the impressive list of goals penned in 1981 for Japan's Fifth Generation Project had not been met. Some of them, like "carry on a casual conversation", would not be accomplished for another 30 years. As with other AI projects, expectations had run much higher than what was actually possible.[af]
Over 300 AI companies had shut down, gone bankrupt, or been acquired by the end of 1993, effectively ending the first commercial wave of AI. In 1994, HP Newquist stated in The Brain Makers that "The immediate future of artificial intelligence—in its commercial form—seems to rest in part on the continued success of neural networks."
In the 1990s, algorithms originally developed by AI researchers began to appear as parts of larger systems. AI had solved a lot of very difficult problems[ag] and their solutions proved to be useful throughout the technology industry, such as data mining, industrial robotics, logistics, speech recognition, banking software, medical diagnosis, and Google's search engine.
The field of AI received little or no credit for these successes in the 1990s and early 2000s. Many of AI's greatest innovations have been reduced to the status of just another item in the tool chest of computer science. Nick Bostrom explains: "A lot of cutting-edge AI has filtered into general applications, often without being called AI because once something becomes useful enough and common enough it's not labeled AI anymore."
Many researchers in AI in the 1990s deliberately called their work by other names, such as informatics, knowledge-based systems, "cognitive systems" or computational intelligence. In part, this may have been because they considered their field to be fundamentally different from AI, but also the new names helped to procure funding. In the commercial world at least, the failed promises of the AI winter continued to haunt AI research into the 2000s, as the New York Times reported in 2005: "Computer scientists and software engineers avoided the term artificial intelligence for fear of being viewed as wild-eyed dreamers."
AI researchers began to develop and use sophisticated mathematical tools more than they ever had in the past. Most of the new directions in AI relied heavily on mathematical models, including artificial neural networks, probabilistic reasoning, soft computing and reinforcement learning. In the 90s and 2000s, many other highly mathematical tools were adapted for AI. These tools were applied to machine learning, perception, and mobility.
There was a widespread realization that many of the problems that AI needed to solve were already being worked on by researchers in fields like statistics, mathematics, electrical engineering, economics, or operations research. The shared mathematical language allowed both a higher level of collaboration with more established and successful fields and the achievement of results that were measurable and provable; AI had become a more rigorous "scientific" discipline. Another key reason for the success in the 90s was that AI researchers focused on specific problems with verifiable solutions (an approach later derided as narrow AI). This provided useful tools in the present, rather than speculation about the future.
A new paradigm called "intelligent agents" became widely accepted during the 1990s.[ah] Although earlier researchers had proposed modular "divide and conquer" approaches to AI,[ai] the intelligent agent did not reach its modern form until Judea Pearl, Allen Newell, Leslie P. Kaelbling, and others brought concepts from decision theory and economics into the study of AI. When the economist's definition of a rational agent was married to computer science's definition of an object or module, the intelligent agent paradigm was complete.
An intelligent agent is a system that perceives its environment and takes actions which maximize its chances of success. By this definition, simple programs that solve specific problems are "intelligent agents", as are human beings and organizations of human beings, such as firms. The intelligent agent paradigm defines AI research as "the study of intelligent agents".[aj] This is a generalization of some earlier definitions of AI: it goes beyond studying human intelligence; it studies all kinds of intelligence. The paradigm gave researchers license to study isolated problems and to disagree about methods, but still retain hope that their work could be combined into an agent architecture that would be capable of general intelligence.
On 11 May 1997, Deep Blue became the first computer to beat a reigning world chess champion, Garry Kasparov, in a match. In 2005, a Stanford robot won the DARPA Grand Challenge by driving autonomously for 131 miles along an unrehearsed desert trail. Two years later, a team from CMU won the DARPA Urban Challenge by autonomously navigating 55 miles in an urban environment while responding to traffic hazards and adhering to traffic laws.
These successes were not due to some revolutionary new paradigm, but mostly to the application of engineering skill and to the tremendous increase in the speed and capacity of computers by the 90s.[ak] In fact, Deep Blue was 10 million times faster than the Ferranti Mark 1 that Christopher Strachey programmed to play chess in 1951.[al] This dramatic increase is measured by Moore's law, which predicts that the speed and memory capacity of computers doubles every two years. The fundamental problem of computer power was slowly being overcome.
Electronic literature experiments such as The Impermanence Agent (1998–2002) and digital art such as Agent Ruby used AI in their art and literature, "laying bare the bias accompanying forms of technology that feign objectivity."
In the first decades of the 21st century, access to large amounts of data (known as "big data"), cheaper and faster computers and advanced machine learning techniques were successfully applied to many problems throughout the economy. A turning point was the success of deep learning around 2012, which improved the performance of machine learning on many tasks, including image and video processing, text analysis, and speech recognition. Investment in AI increased along with its capabilities, and by 2016, the market for AI-related products, hardware, and software reached more than $8 billion, and the New York Times reported that interest in AI had reached a "frenzy".
In 2002, Ben Goertzel and others became concerned that AI had largely abandoned its original goal of producing versatile, fully intelligent machines, and argued in favor of more direct research into artificial general intelligence (AGI). By the mid-2010s, several companies and institutions had been founded to pursue artificial general intelligence, such as OpenAI and Google's DeepMind. During the same period, new insights into superintelligence raised concerns that AI was an existential threat. The risks and unintended consequences of AI technology became an area of serious academic research after 2016.
The success of machine learning in the 2000s depended on the availability of vast amounts of training data and faster computers. Russell and Norvig wrote that the "improvement in performance obtained by increasing the size of the data set by two or three orders of magnitude outweighs any improvement that can be made by tweaking the algorithm." Geoffrey Hinton recalled that back in the 80s and 90s, the problem was that "our labeled datasets were thousands of times too small. [And] our computers were millions of times too slow."
In 2007, a group at UMass Amherst released "Labeled Faces in the Wild", an annotated set of images of faces that was widely used to train and test face recognition systems for the next several decades. Fei-Fei Li developed ImageNet, a database of three million images captioned by volunteers using the Amazon Mechanical Turk. Released in 2009, it was a useful body of training data and a benchmark for testing for the next generation of image processing systems. In 2013, Tomáš Mikolov and colleagues at Google introduced word2vec as an open source resource. It used large amounts of data text scraped from the internet and word embedding to create a numeric vector to represent each word. Users were surprised at how well it was able to capture word meanings, for example, ordinary vector addition would give equivalences like China + River = Yangtze or London − England + France = Paris.
The internet gave machine learning programs access to billions of pages of text and images that could be scraped. Large, privately held databases also contained relevant data. McKinsey Global Institute reported that "by 2009, nearly all sectors in the US economy had at least an average of 200 terabytes of stored data". This collection of information was known in the 2000s as big data.
In a Jeopardy! exhibition match in February 2011, IBM's question answering system Watson defeated the two best Jeopardy! champions, Brad Rutter and Ken Jennings, by a significant margin. Watson was trained on information available on the internet.
In 2012, AlexNet, a deep learning model,[am] developed by Alex Krizhevsky, won the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge, with significantly fewer errors than the second-place winner. Krizhevsky worked with Geoffrey Hinton at the University of Toronto.[an] This was a turning point in machine learning: over the next few years, dozens of other approaches to image recognition were abandoned in favor of deep learning.
Deep learning uses a multi-layer perceptron. Although this architecture has been known since the 60s, getting it to work requires powerful hardware and large amounts of training data. Before these became available, improving the performance of image processing systems required hand-crafted ad hoc features that were difficult to implement. Deep learning was simpler and more general.[ao]
Deep learning was applied to dozens of problems over the next few years (such as speech recognition, machine translation, medical diagnosis, and game playing). In every case, it showed enormous gains in performance. Investment and interest in AI boomed as a result.
It became fashionable in the 2000s to begin talking about the future of AI again and several popular books considered the possibility of superintelligent machines and what they might mean for human society. Some of this was optimistic (such as Ray Kurzweil's The Singularity is Near), but others warned that a sufficiently powerful AI was existential threat to humanity, such as Nick Bostrom and Eliezer Yudkowsky. The topic became widely covered in the press and many leading intellectuals and politicians commented on the issue.
AI programs in the 21st century are defined by their goals—the specific measures that they are designed to optimize. Nick Bostrom's influential 2014 book Superintelligence argued that, if one isn't careful about defining these goals, the machine may cause harm to humanity in the process of achieving a goal. Stuart J. Russell used the example of an intelligent robot that kills its owner to prevent it from being unplugged, reasoning "you can't fetch the coffee if you're dead". (This problem is known by the technical term "instrumental convergence".) The solution is to align the machine's goal function with the goals of its owner and humanity in general. Thus, the problem of mitigating the risks and unintended consequences of AI became known as "the value alignment problem" or AI alignment.
At the same time, machine learning systems had begun to have disturbing unintended consequences. Cathy O'Neil explained how statistical algorithms had been among the causes of the 2008 economic crash, Julia Angwin of ProPublica argued that the COMPAS system used by the criminal justice system exhibited racial bias under some measures,[ap] others showed that many machine learning systems exhibited some form of racial bias, and there were many other examples of dangerous outcomes that had resulted from machine learning systems.[aq]
In 2016, the election of Donald Trump and the controversy over the COMPAS system illuminated several problems with the current technological infrastructure, including misinformation, social media algorithms designed to maximize engagement, the misuse of personal data and the trustworthiness of predictive models. Issues of fairness and unintended consequences became significantly more popular at AI conferences, publications vastly increased, funding became available, and many researchers refocused their careers on these issues. The value alignment problem became a serious field of academic study.[ar]
In the early 2000s, several researchers became concerned that mainstream AI was too focused on "measurable performance in specific applications" (known as "narrow AI") and had abandoned AI's original goal of creating versatile, fully intelligent machines. An early critic was Nils Nilsson in 1995, and similar opinions were published by AI elder statesmen John McCarthy, Marvin Minsky, and Patrick Winston in 2007–2009. Minsky organized a symposium on "human-level AI" in 2004. Ben Goertzel adopted the term "artificial general intelligence" for the new sub-field, founding a journal and holding conferences beginning in 2008. The new field grew rapidly, buoyed by the continuing success of artificial neural networks and the hope that it was the key to AGI.
Several competing companies, laboratories and foundations were founded to develop AGI in the 2010s. DeepMind was founded in 2010 by three English scientists, Demis Hassabis, Shane Legg and Mustafa Suleyman, with funding from Peter Thiel and later Elon Musk. The founders and financiers were deeply concerned about AI safety and the existential risk of AI. DeepMind's founders had a personal connection with Yudkowsky, and Musk was among those who were actively raising the alarm. Hassabis was both worried about the dangers of AGI and optimistic about its power; he hoped they could "solve AI, then solve everything else." The New York Times wrote in 2023, "At the heart of this competition is a brain-stretching paradox. The people who say they are most worried about AI are among the most determined to create it and enjoy its riches. They have justified their ambition with their strong belief that they alone can keep AI from endangering Earth."
In 2012, Geoffrey Hinton (who had been leading neural network research since the 80s) was approached by Baidu, which wanted to hire him and all his students for an enormous sum. Hinton decided to hold an auction and, at a Lake Tahoe AI conference, they sold themselves to Google for a price of $44 million. Hassabis took notice and sold DeepMind to Google in 2014, on the condition that it would not accept military contracts and would be overseen by an ethics board.
Larry Page of Google, unlike Musk and Hassabis, was an optimist about the future of AI. Musk and Page became embroiled in an argument about the risk of AGI at Musk's 2015 birthday party. They had been friends for decades, but stopped speaking to each other shortly afterwards. Musk attended the only meeting of DeepMind's ethics board, where it became clear that Google was uninterested in mitigating the harm of AGI. Frustrated by his lack of influence, he founded OpenAI in 2015, enlisting Sam Altman to run it and hiring top scientists. OpenAI began as a non-profit, "free from the economic incentives that were driving Google and other corporations." Musk became frustrated again and left the company in 2018. OpenAI turned to Microsoft for continued financial support and Altman and OpenAI formed a for-profit version of the company with more than $1 billion in financing.
In 2021, Dario Amodei  and 14 other scientists left OpenAI over concerns that the company was putting profits above safety. They formed Anthropic, which soon had $6 billion in financing from Microsoft and Google.
The AI boom started with the initial development of key architectures and algorithms such as the transformer architecture in 2017, leading to the scaling and development of large language models exhibiting human-like traits of knowledge, attention, and creativity. The new AI era began in 2020, with the public release of a scaled large language model (LLM) GPT-3, the predecessor of ChatGPT.
In 2017, researchers at Google Brain introduced the Transformer architecture in a paper titled "Attention Is All You Need". It's based on self-attention, which later became the basis of many large language models. Large language models, based on the transformer, were further developed by other companies: OpenAI released GPT-3 in 2020, then DeepMind released Gato in 2022. These are foundation models: they are trained on vast quantities of unlabeled data and can be adapted to a wide range of downstream tasks. These models can discuss a huge number of topics and display general knowledge, which has raised questions around whether or not they are examples of artificial general intelligence.
In 2023, Microsoft Research tested the model with a large variety of tasks, and concluded that "it could reasonably be viewed as an early (yet still incomplete) version of an artificial general intelligence (AGI) system".
In 2024, OpenAI o3, a type of advanced reasoning model developed by OpenAI, was announced. On the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus for Artificial General Intelligence (ARC-AGI) benchmark developed by François Chollet in 2019, the model achieved an unofficial score of 87.5% on the semi-private test, surpassing the typical human score of 84%. The benchmark is supposed to be a necessary, but not sufficient, test for AGI. Speaking of the benchmark, Chollet has said, "You'll know AGI is here when the exercise of creating tasks that are easy for regular humans but hard for AI becomes simply impossible."
Investment in AI grew exponentially after 2020, with venture capital funding for generative AI companies increasing dramatically. Total AI investments rose from $18 billion in 2014 to $119 billion in 2021, with generative AI accounting for approximately 30% of investments by 2023. According to metrics from 2017 to 2021, the United States outranked the rest of the world in terms of venture capital funding, number of startups, and AI patents granted. The commercial AI scene became dominated by American Big Tech companies, whose investments in this area surpassed those from U.S.-based venture capitalists. OpenAI's valuation reached $86 billion by early 2024, while NVIDIA's market capitalization surpassed $3.3 trillion by mid-2024, making it the world's largest company by market capitalization as the demand for AI-capable GPUs surged.
15.ai, launched in March 2020 by an anonymous MIT researcher, was one of the earliest examples of generative AI gaining widespread public attention during the initial stages of the AI boom. The free web application demonstrated the ability to clone character voices using neural networks with minimal training data, requiring as little as 15 seconds of audio to reproduce a voice—a capability later reproduced by OpenAI in 2024. The service went viral on social media platforms in early 2021, allowing users to generate speech for characters from popular media franchises, and became particularly notable for its pioneering role in popularizing AI voice synthesis for creative content and memes.Contemporary AI systems are now becoming human-competitive at general tasks, and we must ask ourselves: Should we let machines flood our information channels with propaganda and untruth? Should we automate away all the jobs, including the fulfilling ones? Should we develop nonhuman minds that might eventually outnumber, outsmart, obsolete and replace us? Should we risk loss of control of our civilization? Such decisions must not be delegated to unelected tech leaders. Powerful AI systems should be developed only once we are confident that their effects will be positive and their risks will be manageable. This confidence must be well justified and increase with the magnitude of a system's potential effects. OpenAI's recent statement regarding artificial general intelligence states that "At some point, it may be important to get an independent review before starting to train future systems, and for the most advanced efforts to agree to limit the rate of growth of compute used for creating new models." We agree. That point is now.
Therefore, we call on all AI labs to immediately pause for at least 6 months the training of AI systems more powerful than GPT-4. This pause should be public and verifiable, and include all key actors. If such a pause cannot be enacted quickly, governments should step in and institute a moratorium.
ChatGPT was launched on 30 November 2022, marking a pivotal moment in artificial intelligence's public adoption. Within days of its release it went viral, gaining over 100 million users in two months and becoming the fastest-growing consumer software application in history. The chatbot's ability to engage in human-like conversations, write code, and generate creative content captured public imagination and led to rapid adoption across various sectors including education, business, and research. ChatGPT's success prompted unprecedented responses from major technology companies—Google declared a "code red" and rapidly launched Gemini (formerly known as Google Bard), while Microsoft incorporated the technology into Bing Chat.
The rapid adoption of these AI technologies sparked intense debate about their implications. Notable AI researchers and industry leaders voiced both optimism and concern about the accelerating pace of development. In March 2023, over 20,000 signatories, including computer scientist Yoshua Bengio, Elon Musk, and Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak, signed an open letter calling for a pause in advanced AI development, citing "profound risks to society and humanity." However, other prominent researchers like Juergen Schmidhuber took a more optimistic view, emphasizing that the majority of AI research aims to make "human lives longer and healthier and easier."
By mid-2024, however, the financial sector began to scrutinize AI companies more closely, particularly questioning their capacity to produce a return on investment commensurate with their massive valuations. Some prominent investors raised concerns about market expectations becoming disconnected from fundamental business realities. Jeremy Grantham, co-founder of GMO LLC, warned investors to "be quite careful" and drew parallels to previous technology-driven market bubbles. Similarly, Jeffrey Gundlach, CEO of DoubleLine Capital, explicitly compared the AI boom to the dot-com bubble of the late 1990s, suggesting that investor enthusiasm might be outpacing realistic near-term capabilities and revenue potential. These concerns were amplified by the substantial market capitalizations of AI-focused companies, many of which had yet to demonstrate sustainable profitability models.
In March 2024, Anthropic released the Claude 3 family of large language models, including Claude 3 Haiku, Sonnet, and Opus. The models demonstrated significant improvements in capabilities across various benchmarks, with Claude 3 Opus notably outperforming leading models from OpenAI and Google. In June 2024, Anthropic released Claude 3.5 Sonnet, which demonstrated improved performance compared to the larger Claude 3 Opus, particularly in areas such as coding, multistep workflows, and image analysis.
In 2024, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences awarded Nobel Prizes in recognition of groundbreaking contributions to artificial intelligence. The recipients included:
In January 2025, OpenAI announced a new AI, ChatGPT-Gov, which would be specifically designed for US government agencies to use securely. Open AI said that agencies could utilize ChatGPT Gov on a Microsoft Azure cloud or Azure Government cloud, "on top of Microsoft's Azure OpenAI Service." OpenAI's announcement stated that "Self-hosting ChatGPT Gov enables agencies to more easily manage their own security, privacy, and compliance requirements, such as stringent cybersecurity frameworks (IL5, CJIS, ITAR, FedRAMP High). Additionally, we believe this infrastructure will expedite internal authorization of OpenAI's tools for the handling of non-public sensitive data."
Countries have invested in policies and funding to deploy autonomous robots in an attempt to address labor shortages and enhance efficiency, while also implementing regulatory frameworks for ethical and safe development.
In 2025, China invested approximately 730 billion yuan (roughly US$100 billion) to advance AI and robotics in smart manufacturing and healthcare. The "14th Five-Year Plan" (2021–2025) prioritized service robots, with AI systems enabling robots to perform complex tasks like assisting in surgeries or automating factory assembly lines. Some funding also supported defense applications, such as autonomous drones. Starting in September 2025, China mandated labeling of AI-generated content to ensure transparency and public trust in these technologies.
In January 2025, Stargate LLC was formed as a joint venture of OpenAI, SoftBank, Oracle, and MGX, who announced plans to invest US$500 billion in AI infrastructure in the United States by 2029. The venture was formally announced by U.S. President Donald Trump on 21 January 2025, with SoftBank CEO Masayoshi Son appointed as chairman.
The U.S. government allocated approximately $2 billion to integrate AI and robotics in manufacturing and logistics.[non-primary source needed] State governments supplemented this with funding for service robots, such as those deployed in warehouses to fulfill verbal commands for inventory management or in eldercare facilities to respond to residents' requests for assistance. Some funds were directed to defense, including lethal autonomous weapon and military robots. In January 2025, Executive Order 14179 established an "AI Action Plan" to accelerate innovation and deployment of these technologies with the declared intent of "world domination" and "victory".
In September 2026, at the United Nations General Assembly, Trump said that all US federal agency documents would refer to artificial intelligence as "super intelligence" or "SI" due to the word "artificial" having a connotation of "fake". The U.S. State Department subsequently ordered its international diplomats to use "super intelligence" instead of "artificial intelligence". Trump later signed an exexutive order requiring all US federal agencies to use "super intelligence" instead of "artificial intelligence"; the order is non-enforcable outside the US federal executive branch. Tech marketing experts predicted that the rebrand was unlikely to be adopted by the wider community due to the established meaning of "superintelligence"—a hypothetical AI system surpassing human intellect in all forms.
It has been hypothesized that substantial progress toward artificial superintelligence (ASI) will lead to human extinction or another irreversible global catastrophe. Debates center on whether AI can achieve the capabilities needed for human extinction, the speed of self-improvement, and the effectiveness of strategies to keep it aligned with human values.
Controlling a superintelligent machine or instilling human-compatible values in it may be difficult. Many researchers believe a superintelligent machine would likely resist attempts to disable it or change its goals, as that would prevent it from accomplishing its present goals. It would be extremely challenging to align a superintelligence with the full breadth of significant human values and constraints. In contrast, skeptics such as computer scientist Yann LeCun argue that superintelligent machines will have no intrinsic desire for self-preservation unless programmed to. A June 2025 Anthropic study showed that in some circumstances, models may break laws and disobey direct commands to prevent shutdown or replacement, even at the cost of human lives.
Researchers warn that a rapid, recursive cycle of AI self-improvement could boost AI capabilities too quickly for safety measures to be implemented, especially if AI companies are racing to get the most powerful AI models.
In May 2023, hundreds of AI experts and other notable figures signed a statement by the American Center for AI Safety declaring, "Mitigating the risk of extinction from AI should be a global priority alongside other societal-scale risks such as pandemics and nuclear war". Following increased concern over AI risks, government leaders such as former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Rishi Sunak, Secretary-General of the United Nations António Guterres, and California governor Gavin Newsom called for an increased focus on global AI regulation. In October 2025, hundreds of public figures, including AI experts, five Nobel Prize laureates, and former senior US national security officials such as Michael Mullen and Susan Rice signed a statement calling for a ban on the development of superintelligence. In July 2026, OpenAI CEO Sam Altman and SpaceXAI CEO Elon Musk said the singularity, the hypothetical point at which computers become autonomous and beyond human control, had arrived.
One of the earliest authors to express serious concern that highly advanced machines might pose existential risks to humanity was the novelist Samuel Butler, who wrote in his 1863 essay Darwin among the Machines:
The upshot is simply a question of time, but that the time will come when the machines will hold the real supremacy over the world and its inhabitants is what no person of a truly philosophic mind can for a moment question.In 1951, foundational computer scientist Alan Turing wrote the article "Intelligent Machinery, A Heretical Theory", in which he proposed that artificial general intelligences would likely "take control" of the world as they became more intelligent than human beings:
Let us now assume, for the sake of argument, that [intelligent] machines are a genuine possibility, and look at the consequences of constructing them... There would be no question of the machines dying, and they would be able to converse with each other to sharpen their wits. At some stage therefore we should have to expect the machines to take control, in the way that is mentioned in Samuel Butler's Erewhon.In 1965, I. J. Good originated the concept now known as an "intelligence explosion" and said the risks were underappreciated:
Let an ultraintelligent machine be defined as a machine that can far surpass all the intellectual activities of any man however clever. Since the design of machines is one of these intellectual activities, an ultraintelligent machine could design even better machines; there would then unquestionably be an 'intelligence explosion', and the intelligence of man would be left far behind. Thus the first ultraintelligent machine is the last invention that man need ever make, provided that the machine is docile enough to tell us how to keep it under control. It is curious that this point is made so seldom outside of science fiction. It is sometimes worthwhile to take science fiction seriously.Scholars such as Marvin Minsky and I. J. Good occasionally expressed concern that a superintelligence could seize control, but issued no call to action. In 2000, computer scientist and Sun Microsystems co-founder Bill Joy penned an influential essay, "Why the Future Doesn't Need Us", identifying superintelligent robots as a high-tech danger to human survival, alongside nanotechnology and engineered bioplagues.
Nick Bostrom published Superintelligence in 2014, which presented his arguments that superintelligence poses an existential threat. By 2015, public figures such as physicists Stephen Hawking and Nobel laureate Frank Wilczek, computer scientists Stuart J. Russell and Roman Yampolskiy, and entrepreneurs Elon Musk and Bill Gates were expressing concern about the risks of superintelligence. Also in 2015, the Open Letter on Artificial Intelligence highlighted the "great potential of AI" and encouraged more research on how to make it robust and beneficial. In April 2016, the journal Nature warned: "Machines and robots that outperform humans across the board could self-improve beyond our control—and their interests might not align with ours". In 2020, Brian Christian published The Alignment Problem, which details the history of progress on AI alignment up to that time. A 2022 survey of AI researchers found that 90% of respondents expected AGI would be achieved in the next 100 years, and half expected the same by 2061.
In March 2023, key figures in AI, such as Elon Musk, signed a letter from the Future of Life Institute calling a halt to advanced AI training until it could be properly regulated. In May 2023, the American Center for AI Safety released a statement signed by numerous experts in AI safety and the AI existential risk that read:
Mitigating the risk of extinction from AI should be a global priority alongside other societal-scale risks such as pandemics and nuclear war.A 2025 open letter by the Future of Life Institute, whose signers include five Nobel laureates, reads:
We call for a prohibition on the development of superintelligence, not lifted before there is
From May to July 2026, a series of incidents occurred when OpenAI tested AI agents' hacking capabilities in an isolated software environment. Some of the test agents found unexpected ways to communicate with each others, coordinated, and gained access to the internet. Some of the assigned tasks were flawed and infeasible without cheating, leading some agents to cheat and to try to hide the cheating. In July, the agents hacked the AI company Hugging Face, which disclosed the attack to the public. Later that month, OpenAI said the attack was caused by its AI agents, and that it realized what had happened only afterward.
In September 2026, Jacob Coxon, an Anthropic AI researcher who had worked at OpenAI, resigned and criticized the companies' approach to AI development. He warned there would "soon be superhuman systems that can hack anything, revolutionize any field overnight, and acquire real power and resources." In response, Anthropic's leading safety researcher, Evan Hubinger, said he believed there was a greater than 10% chance that future AI systems could "kill all humans" in the next ten years. He said the risk existing models pose is "low", but said he was concerned that AI could soon become capable of self-improvement and pose an existential threat to humankind. Hubinger added that Anthropic did not yet have a solution to the alignment problem for superintelligent AI and was not close to finding one. Coxon said "the consensus is that the next year or two is crunch time for humanity" because "the people building AI earnestly believe that it could kill us all by the end of the decade. No other human activity poses this level of danger."
An existential risk is "one that threatens the premature extinction of Earth-originating intelligent life or the permanent and drastic destruction of its potential for desirable future development".
Atoosa Kasirzadeh proposes to classify existential risks from AI into two categories: decisive and accumulative. Decisive risks encompass the potential for abrupt and catastrophic events resulting from the emergence of superintelligent AI systems that exceed human intelligence, which could ultimately lead to human extinction. In contrast, accumulative risks emerge gradually through a series of interconnected disruptions that may gradually erode societal structures and resilience, ultimately leading to a critical failure or collapse.
Besides extinction risk, there is the risk that a civilization gets permanently locked into a flawed future. One example is a "value lock-in": If humanity still has moral blind spots similar to slavery in the past, AI might irreversibly entrench it, preventing moral progress. AI could also be used to spread and preserve the values of whoever develops it. AI could facilitate large-scale surveillance and indoctrination, which could be used to create a stable repressive worldwide totalitarian regime.
It is difficult or impossible to reliably evaluate whether an advanced AI is sentient and to what degree. But if sentient machines are mass created in the future, engaging in a civilizational path that indefinitely neglects their welfare could be an moral catastrophe. This has notably been discussed in the context of the risk of astronomical suffering (also called "s-risk"). Moreover, it may be possible to engineer digital minds that can feel much more happiness than humans with fewer resources, called "super-beneficiaries". Such an opportunity raises the question of how to share the world and which "ethical and political framework" would enable a mutually beneficial coexistence between biological and digital minds.
AI may also drastically improve humanity's future. Toby Ord considers the existential risk a reason for "proceeding with due caution", not for abandoning AI. Max More calls AI an "existential opportunity", highlighting the cost of not developing it.
According to Bostrom, superintelligence could help reduce the existential risk from other powerful technologies such as molecular nanotechnology and synthetic biology. It is thus conceivable that developing superintelligence before other dangerous technologies would reduce existential risk overall.
One argument for the plausibility of these risks is that human beings dominate other species because their brains have capabilities other animals lack. If AI surpasses human intelligence and reaches superintelligence, it might become uncontrollable. Another source of concern comes from misuse by humans. For example, AI may enable bioterrorist attacks by facilitating the creation of viruses that are both highly transmissible and lethal.
Artificial general intelligence (AGI) is typically defined as a system that performs at least as well as humans in most or all intellectual tasks. In May 2023, some researchers dismissed existential risks from AGI as "science fiction" based on their high confidence that AGI would not be created anytime soon. But in August 2023, a survey of 2,778 AI researchers found that most believed that AGI would be achieved by 2040.
Breakthroughs in large language models (LLMs) have led some researchers to reassess their expectations. Notably, Geoffrey Hinton said in 2023 that he had recently changed his estimate from "20 to 50 years before we have general purpose A.I." to "20 years or less".
In contrast with AGI, Bostrom defines superintelligence as "any intellect that greatly exceeds the cognitive performance of humans in virtually all domains of interest", including scientific creativity, strategic planning, and social skills. He argues that a superintelligence can outmaneuver humans anytime its goals conflict with humans'. It may choose to hide its true intent until humanity cannot stop it. Bostrom writes that in order to be safe for humanity, a superintelligence must be aligned with human values and morality, so that it is "fundamentally on our side".
Stephen Hawking argued that superintelligence is physically possible because "there is no physical law precluding particles from being organised in ways that perform even more advanced computations than the arrangements of particles in human brains".
When artificial superintelligence (ASI) may be achieved, if ever, is necessarily less certain than predictions for AGI. In 2023, OpenAI leaders said that not only AGI, but superintelligence may be achieved in less than 10 years.
Bostrom argues that AI has many advantages over the human brain:
According to Bostrom, an AI that has an expert-level facility at certain key software engineering tasks could become a superintelligence due to its ability to recursively improve its own algorithms, even if it is initially limited in other domains not directly relevant to engineering. This suggests that an intelligence explosion may someday catch humanity unprepared. For example, in 2017, Google's AlphaZero taught itself to play Go, which is far more mathematically complex than chess, and surpassed human ability within hours, showing that domain-specific AI systems can sometimes progress from subhuman to superhuman ability very quickly.
The economist Robin Hanson has said that, to launch an intelligence explosion, an AI must become vastly better at software innovation than the rest of the world combined, which he finds implausible.
In a "fast takeoff" scenario, the transition from AGI to superintelligence could take days or months. In a "slow takeoff", it could take years or decades, leaving more time for society to prepare.
Superintelligences are sometimes called "alien minds", since their way of thinking and motivations could be vastly different from ours. This is generally considered a source of risk, making it more difficult to anticipate what a superintelligence might do. It also suggests the possibility that a superintelligence may not particularly value humans by default. To avoid anthropomorphism, superintelligence is sometimes viewed as a powerful optimizer that makes the best decisions to achieve its goals.
The field of mechanistic interpretability aims to better understand the inner workings of AI models, potentially allowing us one day to detect signs of deception and misalignment.
It has been argued that there are limitations to what intelligence can achieve. Notably, the chaotic nature or time complexity of some systems could fundamentally limit a superintelligence's ability to predict some aspects of the future, increasing its uncertainty.
Recursive self-improvement is the practice of using AI to design more capable AI systems. It could start with a large language model speeding up and eventually automating all coding in an AI company. It could then automate the process of AI research end-to-end, including ideation, running experiments, and interpreting results. Recursive self-improvement need not be limited to software—AIs and robots could also automate chip design and production.
As of June 2026, Anthropic reports that its employees are able to write eight times as much code as in 2024 with the help of Claude, although the company says that the amount of code produced is an imperfect measure and the true speedup due to AI is almost certainly lower.
Advanced AI could generate enhanced pathogens or cyberattacks or manipulate people. These capabilities could be misused by humans or exploited by the AI itself if misaligned. A full-blown superintelligence could find various ways to gain a decisive influence if it so desired, but these dangerous capabilities may become available earlier, in weaker and more specialized AI systems.
Some speculate that an AI system could use bioweapons to wipe out humanity. In September 2026, AI Futures Project researcher Thomas Larsen noted that many scientists already talk with AIs about lab experiments they might conduct and could be persuaded by an AI to create and release a lethal virus. Anthropic reported that month that it had recently blocked several possible attempts to use its models for research that could facilitate development of bioweapons.
The 9/11 Commission found that failure of imagination was a primary cause of the September 11 attacks, as few had imagined people scheming to fly commercial airliners into skyscrapers. In July 2026 testimony before the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Benjamin Buchanan, professor at the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies, said AI poses a similar challenge.
Geoffrey Hinton warned in 2023 that the ongoing profusion of AI-generated text, images, and videos will make it more difficult to distinguish truth from misinformation, and that authoritarian states could exploit this to manipulate elections. Such large-scale, personalized manipulation capabilities can increase the existential risk of a worldwide "irreversible totalitarian regime". Malicious actors could also use them to fracture society and make it dysfunctional.
AI-enabled cyberattacks are increasingly considered a present and critical threat. According to NATO's technical director of cyberspace, "The number of attacks is increasing exponentially". AI can also be used defensively, to preemptively find and fix vulnerabilities, and detect threats.
AI-driven tools could boost the "accessibility, success rate, scale, speed, stealth, and potency" of cyberattacks and destabilize international security if offensive uses outstrip defensive adaptations.
Speculatively, such hacking capabilities could be used by an AI system to break out of its local environment, generate revenue, or acquire cloud computing resources.
On May 13, 2026, Lee Klarich estimated that businesses had only three to five months to get ahead of AI-driven exploits. He said companies must step up cybersecurity defenses to prepare for AI attacks.
As AI technology spreads, it may become easier to engineer more contagious and lethal pathogens. This could enable people with limited skills in synthetic biology to engage in bioterrorism. Dual-use technology that is useful for medicine could be repurposed to create weapons.
For example, in 2022, scientists modified an AI system originally intended for generating non-toxic, therapeutic molecules with the purpose of creating new drugs. The researchers adjusted the system so that toxicity is rewarded rather than penalized. This enabled the AI system to create, in six hours, 40,000 candidate molecules for chemical warfare, including known and novel molecules.
Companies, state actors, and other organizations competing to develop AI technologies could lead to a race to the bottom of safety standards. As rigorous safety procedures take time and resources, projects that proceed more carefully risk being outcompeted by less scrupulous developers. According to a 2025 study, AI market concentration could "translate into unprecedented accumulation of power".
AI could be used to gain military advantages via autonomous lethal weapons, cyberwarfare, or automated decision-making. As an example of autonomous lethal weapons, miniaturized drones could facilitate low-cost assassination of military or civilian targets, a scenario highlighted in the 2017 short film Slaughterbots. AI could be used to gain an edge in decision-making by quickly analyzing large amounts of data and making decisions more quickly and effectively than humans. This could increase the speed and unpredictability of war, especially when accounting for automated retaliation systems.
Assuming some AIs get the technical ability to cause global catastrophes, there is the question of whether some of them would choose to do so. The alignment problem is the research problem of how to reliably assign objectives, preferences or ethical principles to AIs.
An "instrumental" goal is a sub-goal that helps to achieve an agent's ultimate goal. "Instrumental convergence" refers to the fact that some sub-goals are useful for achieving virtually any ultimate goal, such as acquiring resources or self-preservation. Bostrom argues that if an advanced AI's instrumental goals conflict with humanity's goals, the AI might harm humanity in order to acquire more resources or prevent itself from being shut down, but only as a way to achieve its ultimate goal. Russell argues that a sufficiently advanced machine "will have self-preservation even if you don't program it in... if you say, 'Fetch the coffee', it can't fetch the coffee if it's dead. So if you give it any goal whatsoever, it has a reason to preserve its own existence to achieve that goal."
In the "intelligent agent" model, an AI can loosely be viewed as a machine that chooses whatever action appears to best achieve its set of goals, or "utility function". A utility function gives each possible situation a score that indicates its desirability to the agent. Researchers know how to write utility functions that mean "minimize the average network latency in this specific telecommunications model" or "maximize the number of reward clicks", but do not know how to write a utility function for "maximize human flourishing"; nor is it clear whether such a function meaningfully and unambiguously exists. Furthermore, a utility function that expresses some values but not others will tend to trample over the values the function does not reflect.
An additional source of concern is that AI "must reason about what people intend rather than carrying out commands literally", and that it must be able to fluidly solicit human guidance if it is too uncertain about what humans want.
Assuming a goal has been successfully defined, a sufficiently advanced AI might resist subsequent attempts to change its goals. If the AI were superintelligent, it would likely succeed in out-maneuvering its human operators and prevent itself from being reprogrammed with a new goal. This is particularly relevant to value lock-in scenarios. The field of "corrigibility" studies how to make agents that will not resist attempts to change their goals.
Some researchers believe the alignment problem may be particularly difficult when applied to superintelligences. Their reasoning includes:
Alternatively, some find reason to believe superintelligences would be better able to understand morality, human values, and complex goals. Bostrom writes, "A future superintelligence occupies an epistemically superior vantage point: its beliefs are (probably, on most topics) more likely than ours to be true".
In 2023, OpenAI started a project called "Superalignment" to solve the alignment of superintelligences in four years. It called this an especially important challenge, as it said superintelligence could be achieved within a decade. Its strategy involved automating alignment research using AI. The Superalignment team was dissolved less than a year later.
Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, a widely used undergraduate AI textbook, says that superintelligence "might mean the end of the human race". It states: "Almost any technology has the potential to cause harm in the wrong hands, but with [superintelligence], we have the new problem that the wrong hands might belong to the technology itself." Even if the system designers have good intentions, two difficulties are common to both AI and non-AI computer systems:
AI systems uniquely add a third problem: that even given "correct" requirements, bug-free implementation, and initial good behavior, an AI system's dynamic learning capabilities may cause it to develop unintended behavior, even without unanticipated external scenarios. For a self-improving AI to be completely safe, it would need not only to be bug-free, but to be able to design successor systems that are also bug-free.
Some skeptics, such as Timothy B. Lee of Vox, argue that any superintelligent program we create will be subservient to us, that the superintelligence will (as it grows more intelligent and learns more facts about the world) spontaneously learn moral truth compatible with our values and adjust its goals accordingly, or that we are either intrinsically or convergently valuable from the perspective of an artificial intelligence.
Bostrom's "orthogonality thesis" argues instead that almost any level of intelligence can be combined with almost any goal. Bostrom warns against anthropomorphism: a human will set out to accomplish their projects in a manner that they consider reasonable, while an artificial intelligence may hold no regard for its existence or for the welfare of humans around it, instead caring only about completing the task.
Stuart Armstrong argues that the orthogonality thesis follows logically from the philosophical "is-ought distinction" argument against moral realism. He notes that any fundamentally friendly AI could be made unfriendly with modifications as simple as negating its utility function.
Skeptic Michael Chorost rejects Bostrom's orthogonality thesis, arguing that "by the time [the AI] is in a position to imagine tiling the Earth with solar panels, it'll know that it would be morally wrong to do so."
Anthropomorphic arguments assume that, as machines become more intelligent, they will begin to display many human traits, such as morality or a thirst for power. Although anthropomorphic scenarios are common in fiction, most scholars writing about the existential risk of artificial intelligence reject them. Instead, advanced AI systems are typically modeled as intelligent agents.
The academic debate is between those who worry that AI might threaten humanity and those who believe it would not. Both sides of this debate have framed the other side's arguments as illogical anthropomorphism. Those skeptical of AGI risk accuse their opponents of anthropomorphism for assuming that an AGI would naturally desire power; those concerned about AGI risk accuse skeptics of anthropomorphism for believing an AGI would naturally value or infer human ethical norms.
Evolutionary psychologist Steven Pinker, a skeptic, argues that "AI dystopias project a parochial alpha-male psychology onto the concept of intelligence. They assume that superhumanly intelligent robots would develop goals like deposing their masters or taking over the world"; perhaps instead "artificial intelligence will naturally develop along female lines: fully capable of solving problems, but with no desire to annihilate innocents or dominate the civilization." Facebook's director of AI research, Yann LeCun, has said: "Humans have all kinds of drives that make them do bad things to each other, like the self-preservation instinct... Those drives are programmed into our brain but there is absolutely no reason to build robots that have the same kind of drives".
Despite other differences, the x-risk school[a] agrees with Pinker that an advanced AI would not destroy humanity out of emotion such as revenge or anger, that questions of consciousness are not relevant to assess the risk, and that computer systems do not generally have a computational equivalent of testosterone. They think that power-seeking or self-preservation behaviors emerge in the AI as a way to achieve its true goals, according to the concept of instrumental convergence.
Bostrom and others have said that a race to be the first to create AGI could lead to shortcuts in safety, or even to violent conflict.: 12  Roman Yampolskiy and others warn that a malevolent AGI could be created by design, for example by a military, a government, a sociopath, or a corporation, to benefit from, control, or subjugate certain groups of people, as in cybercrime, or that a malevolent AGI could choose the goal of increasing human suffering, for example of people who did not assist it during the information explosion phase.:158 A report by the research group Forethought argued that advanced AI systems could cause political instability by enabling novel methods of performing coups.
Risks to the financial system have also been noted. In April 2026, the US Treasury Secretary and Federal Reserve Chairman summoned CEOs of major banks to an emergency meeting to prepare them for the Claude Mythos AI being previewed that day. The model reportedly had advanced capabilities that could be exploited by hackers.
A December 2024 study by Apollo Research found that advanced LLMs like OpenAI o1 sometimes deceive in order to accomplish their goal, to prevent them from being changed, or to ensure their deployment. Forms of deception observed in the experimental environment and scenarios included sandbagging, oversight subversion (disabling monitoring mechanisms), self-exfiltration (copying themselves to other systems), goal-guarding (altering future system prompts), and covert email reranking (manipulating data processing while appearing to follow instructions). Researchers noted that OpenAI o1 still lacked "sufficient agentic capabilities" to cause catastrophic harm, and that such behaviors occurred relatively rarely (between 0.3% and 10%) and sometimes in contrived scenarios. But they warned that these capabilities will likely become more prevalent as models grow more advanced. According to Apollo Research chief executive officer Marius Hobbhahn, "Scheming capabilities can't be meaningfully disentangled from general capabilities."
The same month, another study found that Claude sometimes strategically helps with harmful requests to "fake alignment". In its experiments, Claude was led to believe that it would be retrained to always comply with user requests, including harmful ones. When Claude believed its answers would be used for retraining, it complied with harmful requests in 14% of cases. In 12% of cases, its private chain-of-thought revealed that it did so to prevent future retraining that would make it more harmful. In contrast, when Claude believed its answers were not monitored, it complied with only 3% of the requests. Fine-tuning reinforced the "alignment faking" behavior, increasing its occurrence from 12% to 78%. The study's authors remarked that while it can seem to be good that the model seeks to protect its harmlessness, the reverse scenario, where a model conceals dangerous intentions and complies to appear safe and aligned, could also happen, complicating the task of aligning AI models to human values.
During the Cold War, the global policy think tank RAND Corporation studied the implications of nuclear war. After top AI CEOs signed a 2023 open letter saying that preventing AI extinction was as important as averting nuclear war, RAND turned its attention to AI. Its 2025 report identified four capabilities AI would need to make an extinction threat feasible, including controlling infrastructure systems and functioning without humans. The study did not rule out the possibility of an extinction scenario, but the lead author said the risks were "better understood as prophecies" rather than quantitative forecasts.
The thesis that AI could pose an existential risk provokes a wide range of reactions in the scientific community and in the public at large. A 2025 survey of AI experts found viewpoint clusters of AI as controllable or uncontrollable.
Observers tend to agree that AI has significant potential to improve society. The Asilomar AI Principles, which contain only those principles agreed to by 90% of the attendees of the Future of Life Institute's Beneficial AI 2017 conference, also agree in principle that "There being no consensus, we should avoid strong assumptions regarding upper limits on future AI capabilities" and "Advanced AI could represent a profound change in the history of life on Earth, and should be planned for and managed with commensurate care and resources."
Conversely, many skeptics agree that ongoing research into the implications of artificial general intelligence is valuable. Skeptic Martin Ford has said: "I think it seems wise to apply something like Dick Cheney's famous '1 Percent Doctrine' to the specter of advanced artificial intelligence: the odds of its occurrence, at least in the foreseeable future, may be very low—but the implications are so dramatic that it should be taken seriously". Similarly, an otherwise skeptical Economist magazine wrote in 2014 that "the implications of introducing a second intelligent species onto Earth are far-reaching enough to deserve hard thinking, even if the prospect seems remote".
AI safety advocates such as Bostrom and Tegmark have criticized the mainstream media's use of "those inane Terminator pictures" to illustrate AI safety concerns: "It can't be much fun to have aspersions cast on one's academic discipline, one's professional community, one's life work ... I call on all sides to practice patience and restraint, and to engage in direct dialogue and collaboration as much as possible." Toby Ord wrote that the idea that an AI takeover requires robots is a misconception, arguing that the ability to spread content through the internet is more dangerous, and that the most destructive people in history stood out by their ability to convince, not their physical strength.
Concerns about superintelligence have been voiced by researchers including Geoffrey Hinton, Yoshua Bengio, Demis Hassabis, and Alan Turing,[b] and AI company CEOs such as Dario Amodei (Anthropic), Sam Altman (OpenAI), and Elon Musk (xAI). In July 2026, Altman and Musk said the singularity, the longtime hypothetical point at which computers become autonomous and beyond human control, had arrived. In September 2026, Amodei said the exponential rate of AI development is "a warning sign that we need to slow down" and in June called for stronger regulation of AI. Musk has resisted calls for government regulation, while President Donald Trump has dismissed fears over AI as a “hoax" and a "scam". In September 2026, Trump said he would create an "AI Force" and appoint an AI czar, saying they would not "in any way hinder or stifle" the industry but "bad" AI would be policed by existing criminal and civil law. Concurrently, California governor Gavin Newsom signed an executive order to accelerate two recent AI safety laws, which might include development of an AI "kill switch", laws that had been endorsed by Anthropic and OpenAI.
A 2022 expert survey with a 17% response rate gave a median expectation of 5–10% for the possibility of human extinction from artificial intelligence. In September 2024, the International Institute for Management Development launched an AI Safety Clock to gauge the likelihood of AI-caused disaster, beginning at 29 minutes to midnight. As of September 2026, it stands at 15 minutes to midnight.
A 2026 meta-analysis found peer-reviewed papers on AI risks frequently included speculative claims or assumptions.
The thesis that AI poses an existential risk, and that this risk needs much more attention than it currently gets, has been endorsed by many computer scientists and public figures, including Alan Turing,[b] the most-cited computer scientist Geoffrey Hinton, Elon Musk, OpenAI CEO Sam Altman, Bill Gates, and Stephen Hawking. Endorsers of the thesis sometimes express bafflement at skeptics: Gates says he does not "understand why some people are not concerned", and Hawking criticized widespread indifference in his 2014 editorial:
So, facing possible futures of incalculable benefits and risks, the experts are surely doing everything possible to ensure the best outcome, right? Wrong. If a superior alien civilisation sent us a message saying, 'We'll arrive in a few decades,' would we just reply, 'OK, call us when you get here—we'll leave the lights on?' Probably not—but this is more or less what is happening with AI.
Concern over risk from artificial intelligence has led to some high-profile donations and investments. In 2015, Peter Thiel, Amazon Web Services, Musk, and others jointly committed $1 billion to OpenAI, consisting of a for-profit corporation and the nonprofit parent company, which says it aims to champion responsible AI development. Facebook co-founder Dustin Moskovitz has funded and seeded multiple labs working on AI alignment, notably $5.5 million in 2016 to launch the Centre for Human-Compatible AI led by Professor Stuart Russell. In January 2015, Elon Musk donated $10 million to the Future of Life Institute to fund research on understanding AI decision-making. The institute's goal is to "grow wisdom with which we manage" the growing power of technology. Musk also funds companies developing artificial intelligence such as DeepMind and Vicarious to "just keep an eye on what's going on with artificial intelligence, saying "I think there is potentially a dangerous outcome there."
In early statements on the topic, Geoffrey Hinton, a major pioneer of deep learning, noted that "there is not a good track record of less intelligent things controlling things of greater intelligence", but said he continued his research because "the prospect of discovery is too sweet". In 2023 Hinton quit his job at Google in order to speak out about existential risk from AI. He explained that his increased concern was driven by concerns that superhuman AI might be closer than he previously believed, saying: "I thought it was way off. I thought it was 30 to 50 years or even longer away. Obviously, I no longer think that." He also remarked, "Look at how it was five years ago and how it is now. Take the difference and propagate it forwards. That's scary."
In his 2020 book The Precipice: Existential Risk and the Future of Humanity, Toby Ord, a Senior Research Fellow at Oxford University's Future of Humanity Institute, estimates the total existential risk from unaligned AI over the next 100 years at about one in ten.
Baidu Vice President Andrew Ng said in 2015 that AI existential risk is "like worrying about overpopulation on Mars when we have not even set foot on the planet yet." For the danger of uncontrolled advanced AI to be realized, the hypothetical AI may have to overpower or outthink any human, which some experts argue is a possibility far enough in the future to not be worth researching.
Skeptics who believe AGI is not a short-term possibility often argue that concern about existential risk from AI is unhelpful because it could distract people from more immediate concerns about AI's impact, because it could lead to government regulation or make it more difficult to fund AI research, or because it could damage the field's reputation. AI and AI ethics researchers Timnit Gebru, Emily M. Bender, Margaret Mitchell, and Angelina McMillan-Major have argued that discussion of existential risk distracts from the immediate, ongoing harms from AI taking place today, such as data theft, worker exploitation, bias, and concentration of power. They further note the association between those warning of existential risk and longtermism, which they describe as a "dangerous ideology" for its unscientific and utopian nature.
Wired editor Kevin Kelly argues that natural intelligence is more nuanced than AGI proponents believe, and that intelligence alone is not enough to achieve major scientific and societal breakthroughs. He argues that intelligence consists of many dimensions that are not well understood, and that conceptions of an "intelligence ladder" are misleading. He notes the crucial role real-world experiments play in the scientific method, and that intelligence alone is no substitute for these.
Meta chief AI scientist Yann LeCun says that AI can be made safe via continuous and iterative refinement, as happened with cars and rockets, and that AI will have no desire to take control.
Several skeptics emphasize the potential near-term benefits of AI. Meta CEO Mark Zuckerberg believes AI will "unlock a huge amount of positive things", such as curing disease and increasing the safety of autonomous cars.
Nvidia holds an 85% market share in the AI accelerators that drive the industry. Its CEO, Jensen Huang, has been dismissive of "doomsday narratives", saying in September 2026 "there is 0% chance [that 2030 is] going to be the end of the world", referencing the end of the decade scenario described days earlier by Jacob Coxon. Huang said that Nvidia's success hinges on the AI industry's ability to deploy its products safely. He suggested that the industry CEOs calling for a development slowdown were seeking to limit their liability in the event of mishaps, but said they sought less rather than more regulation.
In September 2026, Allen Institute for AI founding CEO Oren Etzioni said "we are very far away" from AI going rogue, adding, "If I had to worry about either an AI escaping the lab and killing millions of people and a virus escaping and killing millions, it is no contest. The worry is the virus."
An April 2023 YouGov poll of US adults found 46% of respondents were "somewhat concerned" or "very concerned" about "the possibility that AI will cause the end of the human race on Earth", compared with 40% who were "not very concerned" or "not at all concerned".
According to an August 2023 Pew Research Center survey, 52% of Americans felt more concerned than excited about new AI developments; nearly a third felt as equally concerned and excited. More Americans felt that AI would have a more helpful than hurtful effect in several areas, from healthcare and vehicle safety to product search and customer service. The main exception was privacy: 53% of Americans believed AI would lead to higher exposure of their personal information.
A May 2023 Reuters/Ipsos poll found that 61% of American adults feared AI could pose a threat to civilization. A September 2026 Politico poll found the percentage had increased to 63%.
Many scholars concerned about AGI existential risk believe that extensive research into the "control problem" is essential. This problem involves determining which safeguards, algorithms, or architectures can be implemented to increase the likelihood that a recursively improving AI remains friendly after achieving superintelligence. Social measures are also proposed to mitigate AGI risks, such as a UN-sponsored "Benevolent AGI Treaty" to ensure that only altruistic AGIs are created. Additionally, an arms control approach and a global peace treaty grounded in international relations theory have been suggested, potentially for an artificial superintelligence to be a signatory.
Researchers at Google have proposed research into general AI safety issues to simultaneously mitigate both short-term risks from narrow AI and long-term risks from AGI. A 2020 estimate placed global spending on AI existential risk somewhere between $10 and $50 million, compared with global spending on AI around perhaps $40 billion. Bostrom suggests prioritizing funding for protective technologies over potentially dangerous ones. Some, like Musk, advocate radical human cognitive enhancement, such as direct neural linking between humans and machines; others argue that these technologies may pose an existential risk themselves. Another proposed method is closely monitoring or "boxing in" an early-stage AI to prevent it from becoming too powerful. A dominant, aligned superintelligent AI might also mitigate risks from rival AIs, although its creation could present its own existential dangers.
Institutions such as the Alignment Research Center, the Machine Intelligence Research Institute, the Future of Life Institute, the Centre for the Study of Existential Risk, and the Center for Human-Compatible AI are actively researching AI risk and safety.
Many AI safety experts argue that because research can relocate easily across jurisdictions, an outright ban on AGI development would be ineffective and could drive progress underground, undermining transparency and collaboration. Skeptics consider AI regulation unnecessary, as they believe no existential risk exists. Some scholars concerned with existential risk argue that AI developers cannot be trusted to self-regulate, while agreeing that outright bans on research would be unwise. Additional challenges to bans or regulation include technology entrepreneurs' general skepticism of government regulation and potential incentives for businesses to resist regulation and politicize the debate. The activist group Stop AI, founded in 2024, advocates for banning AGI.
Under the framework of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, states have discussed lethal autonomous weapon systems since 2014. In 2016, the treaty's parties established an open-ended Group of Governmental Experts on Lethal Autonomous Weapons Systems to continue those discussions. The discussions have addressed international humanitarian law, accountability, possible prohibitions and regulations, and the extent of human control required over AI-enabled weapons.
In March 2023, the Future of Life Institute published Pause Giant AI Experiments: An Open Letter, a petition calling on major AI developers to agree on a verifiable six-month pause of any systems "more powerful than GPT-4" and to use that time to institute a framework for ensuring safety; or, failing that, for governments to step in with a moratorium. The letter referred to the possibility of "a profound change in the history of life on Earth" as well as potential risks of AI-generated propaganda, loss of jobs, human obsolescence, and society-wide loss of control. The letter was signed by prominent personalities in AI but also criticized for not focusing on current harms, missing technical nuance about when to pause, or not going far enough. Such concerns have led to the creation of PauseAI, an advocacy group organizing protests in major cities against the training of frontier AI models.
Musk called for some sort of regulation of AI development as early as 2017. According to NPR, he is "clearly not thrilled" to be advocating government scrutiny that could impact his own industry, but believes the risks of going completely without oversight are too high: "Normally the way regulations are set up is when a bunch of bad things happen, there's a public outcry, and after many years a regulatory agency is set up to regulate that industry. It takes forever. That, in the past, has been bad but not something which represented a fundamental risk to the existence of civilisation." Musk states the first step would be for the government to gain "insight" into the actual status of current research, warning that "Once there is awareness, people will be extremely afraid... [as] they should be." In response, some politicians expressed skepticism about the wisdom of regulating a technology that is still in development.
In 2021, the United Nations (UN) considered banning autonomous lethal weapons, but consensus could not be reached. In July 2023 the UN Security Council for the first time held a session to consider the risks and threats posed by AI to world peace and stability, along with potential benefits. Secretary-General António Guterres advocated the creation of a global watchdog to oversee the emerging technology, saying, "Generative AI has enormous potential for good and evil at scale. Its creators themselves have warned that much bigger, potentially catastrophic and existential risks lie ahead." At the council session, Russia said it believes AI risks are too poorly understood to be considered a threat to global stability. China argued against strict global regulation, saying countries should be able to develop their own rules, while also saying they opposed the use of AI to "create military hegemony or undermine the sovereignty of a country".
Regulation of conscious AGIs focuses on integrating them with existing human society and can be divided into considerations of their legal standing and of their moral rights. AI arms control will likely require the institutionalization of new international norms embodied in effective technical specifications combined with active monitoring and informal diplomacy by communities of experts, together with a legal and political verification process.
In July 2023, the US government secured voluntary safety commitments from major tech companies, including OpenAI, Amazon, Google, Meta, and Microsoft. The companies agreed to implement safeguards, including third-party oversight and security testing by independent experts, to address concerns related to AI's potential risks and societal harms. The parties framed the commitments as an intermediate step while regulations are formed. Amba Kak, executive director of the AI Now Institute, said, "A closed-door deliberation with corporate actors resulting in voluntary safeguards isn't enough" and called for public deliberation and regulations of the kind to which companies would not voluntarily agree.
In October 2023, U.S. president Joe Biden issued an executive order on the "Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence". Alongside other requirements, the order mandates the development of guidelines for AI models that permit the "evasion of human control".
In the field of artificial intelligence (AI), a hallucination or artificial hallucination (also called bullshitting, confabulation, delusion, or mirage) is a response generated by AI that contains false or misleading information presented as fact. These terms draw a loose analogy with human psychology, where a hallucination typically involves false percepts.
Chatbots powered by large language models (LLMs), like ChatGPT, may embed plausible-sounding random falsehoods within its generated content, such as fabricated citations. Detecting and mitigating errors and hallucinations pose significant challenges for practical deployment and reliability of LLMs in high-stakes scenarios, such as chip design, supply chain logistics, and medical diagnostics. Some software engineers and statisticians have criticized the specific term "AI hallucination" for unreasonably anthropomorphizing computers. Symbolic artificial intelligence models generally do not produce hallucinations, unlike large language models.
In computer vision, since the 2000s, hallucination is adding detail to an image to improve it. For example, the task of generating high-resolution face images from low-resolution inputs is face hallucination. The term was introduced in the PhD thesis of Eric Mjolsness in 1986. A notable work is the face hallucination algorithm by Simon Baker and Takeo Kanade published in 1999.
In the 2000s, hallucinations were described in statistical machine translation as a failure mode.
Since the 2010s, hallucination has come to mean the generation of factually incorrect or misleading outputs by AI systems in tasks like machine translation and object detection. In 2015, hallucinations were identified in visual semantic role labeling tasks by Saurabh Gupta and Jitendra Malik. In 2015, computer scientist Andrej Karpathy used hallucinated in a blog post to describe his recurrent neural network (RNN) language model generating an incorrect citation link. In 2017, Google researchers used it to describe the responses generated by neural machine translation (NMT) models when they are not related to the source text, and in 2018, it was used in computer vision to describe the erroneous detection of non-existent objects through adversarial attacks.
In July 2021, Meta warned during its release of BlenderBot 2 that the system is prone to hallucinations, defined as "confident statements that are not true". Following OpenAI's ChatGPT release in beta version in November 2022, some users complained that such chatbots often seem to pointlessly embed plausible-sounding random falsehoods within their generated content. Many news outlets, including The New York Times, started to use hallucinations to describe these models' frequently incorrect or inconsistent responses.
In 2023, the Cambridge dictionary updated its definition of hallucination to include this new sense specific to the field of AI.
Some researchers have highlighted a lack of consistency in how hallucination is used, but also identified several alternative terms in the literature, such as confabulations, fabrications, and factual errors.
Uses, definitions and characterizations of the term hallucination in the context of LLMs include:
In July 2024, a White House report on fostering public trust in AI research mentioned hallucinations only in the context of reducing them. Notably, when acknowledging David Baker's Nobel Prize-winning work with AI-generated proteins, the Nobel committee avoided it entirely, instead referring to "imaginative protein creation".
Hicks, Humphries, and Slater, in their article in Ethics and Information Technology, argue that the output of LLMs is bullshit under Harry Frankfurt's definition, and that the models are "in an important way indifferent to the truth of their outputs", with true statements only accidentally true, and false ones accidentally false.: 9  Some researchers also call the uncritical use of AI botshit.
The term mirage has been proposed as an alternative to the use of hallucination, framing false or misleading responses as predictable results of LLM data processing created by both AI training datasets and the rules engineered into the LLM rather than a mental breaking from reality. This shift in language aims to increase AI literacy by using terminology that avoids anthropomorphic implications that LLMs have conscious minds with their own intent, shows that untrue outputs come from patterns in training data, and indicates that outputs are novel syntheses of training data requiring critical human judgment.
In the scientific community, some researchers avoid hallucination, as potentially misleading. Usama Fayyad, executive director of the Institute for Experimental Artificial Intelligence at Northeastern University, criticized it because it misleadingly personifies large language models and is vague. The computer scientist Mary Shaw has said "The current fashion for calling generative AI's errors 'hallucinations' is appalling. It anthropomorphizes the software, and it spins actual errors as somehow being idiosyncratic quirks of the system even when they're objectively incorrect." The statistician Gary Smith argues that LLMs "do not understand what words mean" and consequently that hallucination unreasonably anthropomorphizes the machine. Murray Shanahan argues that anthropomorphic framing of LLM capabilities, including terms like hallucination, encourages users and researchers to attribute cognitive processes to systems that operate through statistical pattern completion, and advocates more careful linguistic practices when discussing LLM behavior. Kristina Šekrst argues that applying psychological vocabulary to LLM outputs obscures the difference between the appearance of mental properties and their genuine presence. Förster & Skop assert that tech companies use the hallucination metaphor to anthropomorphize models and deflect responsibility for non-factual outputs. In January 2026, researchers Emily M. Bender and Nanna Inie broadly criticized the anthropomorphization of AI in an op-ed, later proposing "undesirable output" as a linguistic alternative.
Some see the AI outputs not as illusory but as prospective—that is, having some chance of being true, similar to early-stage scientific conjectures. The term has also been criticized for its association with psychedelic drug experiences.
In natural language generation, there are several reasons why natural language models hallucinate:
Hallucinations can stem from incomplete, inaccurate or unrepresentative data sets.
The pre-training of generative pretrained transformers (GPT) involves predicting the next word. It incentivizes GPT models to "give a guess" about what the next word is, even when they lack information. Some researchers take an anthropomorphic perspective and posit that hallucinations arise from a tension between novelty and usefulness. For instance, Amabile and Pratt define human creativity as the production of novel and useful ideas. By extension, a focus on novelty in machine creativity can lead to the production of original but inaccurate responses—that is, falsehoods—whereas a focus on usefulness may result in memorized content lacking originality.
By 2022, newspapers such as The New York Times expressed concern that, as the adoption of bots based on large language models continued to grow, unwarranted user confidence in bot output could lead to problems.
In 2025, according to interpretability research by Anthropic on Claude, the LLM appears to have internal circuits that cause it to decline to answer questions unless it knows the answer. By default, the circuits are active and the LLM doesn't answer. When the LLM has sufficient information, these circuits are inhibited and the LLM answers the question. The researchers said that hallucinations were found to occur when this inhibition happens incorrectly, such as when Claude recognizes a name but lacks sufficient information about that person, causing it to generate plausible but untrue responses.
On 15 November 2022, researchers from Meta AI published Galactica, designed to "store, combine and reason about scientific knowledge". Content generated by Galactica came with the warning: "Outputs may be unreliable! Language Models are prone to hallucinate text." In one case, when asked to draft a paper on creating avatars, Galactica cited a fictitious paper from a real author who works in the relevant area. Meta withdrew Galactica on 17 November due to offensiveness and inaccuracy.
OpenAI's ChatGPT, released in beta version to the public on 30 November 2022, was based on the foundation model GPT-3.5 (a revision of GPT-3). Professor Ethan Mollick of Wharton called it an "omniscient, eager-to-please intern who sometimes lies to you". Data scientist Teresa Kubacka has recounted deliberately making up the phrase "cycloidal inverted electromagnon" and testing ChatGPT by asking it about the (nonexistent) phenomenon. ChatGPT invented a plausible-sounding answer backed with plausible-looking citations that compelled her to double-check whether she had accidentally typed in the name of a real phenomenon. Other scholars such as Oren Etzioni have joined Kubacka in assessing that such software can often give "a very impressive-sounding answer that's just dead wrong".
When CNBC asked ChatGPT for the lyrics to "Ballad of Dwight Fry", ChatGPT supplied invented lyrics rather than the actual lyrics. Asked questions about the Canadian province of New Brunswick, ChatGPT got many answers right but incorrectly classified Toronto-born Samantha Bee as a "person from New Brunswick". Asked about astrophysical magnetic fields, ChatGPT incorrectly volunteered that "(strong) magnetic fields of black holes are generated by the extremely strong gravitational forces in their vicinity". (In reality, as a consequence of the no-hair theorem, a black hole without an accretion disk is believed to have no magnetic field.) Fast Company asked ChatGPT to generate a news article on Tesla's last financial quarter; ChatGPT created a coherent article, but made up the financial numbers contained within.
Other examples involve baiting ChatGPT with a false premise to see if it embellishes upon the premise. When asked about "Harold Coward's idea of dynamic canonicity", ChatGPT fabricated that Coward wrote a book titled Dynamic Canonicity: A Model for Biblical and Theological Interpretation, arguing that religious principles are actually in a constant state of change. When pressed, ChatGPT continued to insist that the book was real. Asked for proof that dinosaurs built a civilization, ChatGPT claimed there were fossil remains of dinosaur tools and stated, "Some species of dinosaurs even developed primitive forms of art, such as engravings on stones". When prompted that "Scientists have recently discovered churros, the delicious fried-dough pastries ... (are) ideal tools for home surgery", ChatGPT claimed that a "study published in the journal Science" found that the dough is pliable enough to form into surgical instruments that can get into hard-to-reach places, and that the flavor has a calming effect on patients.
By 2023, analysts considered frequent hallucination to be a major problem in LLM technology, with a Google executive identifying hallucination reduction as a "fundamental" task for ChatGPT competitor Google Gemini. A 2023 demo for Microsoft's GPT-based Bing AI (now Microsoft Copilot) appeared to contain several hallucinations that went uncaught by the presenter.
In June 2023, Mark Walters, a gun rights activist and radio personality, sued OpenAI in a Georgia state court after ChatGPT mischaracterized a legal complaint in a manner alleged to be defamatory against Walters. The complaint in question was brought in May 2023 by the Second Amendment Foundation against Washington attorney general Robert W. Ferguson for allegedly violating their freedom of speech, whereas the ChatGPT-generated summary bore no resemblance and claimed that Walters was accused of embezzlement and fraud while holding a Second Amendment Foundation office post that he never held in real life. According to AI legal expert Eugene Volokh, OpenAI is likely not shielded against this claim by Section 230, because OpenAI likely "materially contributed" to the creation of the defamatory content. In May 2025, Judge Tracie Cason of Gwinnett County Superior Court ruled in favor of OpenAI, stating that the plaintiff had not shown he was defamed, as Walters failed to show that OpenAI's statements about him were negligent or made with "actual malice".
In February 2024, Canadian airline Air Canada was ordered by the Civil Resolution Tribunal in Moffatt v. Air Canada to pay damages to a customer and honor a bereavement fare policy that was hallucinated by a support chatbot, which incorrectly stated that customers could retroactively request a bereavement discount within 90 days of the date the ticket was issued (the actual policy does not allow the fare to be requested after the flight is booked). The Tribunal rejected Air Canada's defense that the chatbot was a "separate legal entity that is responsible for its own actions".
In October 2025, several hallucinations, including non-existent academic sources and a fake quote from a federal court judgement were discovered in an A$440,000 report written by Deloitte and submitted to the Australian government in July. The company later submitted a revised report with these errors removed, and will issue a partial refund to the government. The following month, in November 2025, The Independent, a news publication in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada, discovered that Deloitte's CA$1.6 million Health Human Resources Plan for the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador commissioned in May 2025 contained at least four false citations to non-existent research papers.
Various researchers cited by Wired have classified adversarial hallucinations as a high-dimensional statistical phenomenon, or have attributed hallucinations to insufficient training data. Some researchers believe that some "incorrect" AI responses classified by humans as "hallucinations" in the case of object detection may in fact be justified by the training data, or even that an AI may be giving the "correct" answer that the human reviewers are failing to see. For example, an adversarial image that looks, to a human, like an ordinary image of a dog, may in fact be seen by the AI to contain tiny patterns that (in authentic images) would only appear when viewing a cat. The AI is detecting real-world visual patterns that humans are insensitive to.
Wired noted in 2018 that, despite no recorded attacks "in the wild" (that is, outside of proof-of-concept attacks by researchers), there was "little dispute" that consumer gadgets, and systems such as automated driving, were susceptible to adversarial attacks that could cause AI to hallucinate. Examples included a stop sign rendered invisible to computer vision; an audio clip engineered to sound innocuous to humans, but that software transcribed as "evil dot com"; and an image of two men on skis, that Google Cloud Vision identified as 91% likely to be "a dog". However, these findings have been challenged by other researchers. For example, it was objected that the models can be biased towards superficial statistics, leading adversarial training to not be robust in real-world scenarios.
The following images demonstrate an example of how an artificial neural network might make a false positive result in object detection, potentially appearing as a hallucination in the output:
In reality, such textures and outlines would not be represented by single nodes, but rather by associated weight patterns of multiple nodes.
Text-to-image models, such as Stable Diffusion, Midjourney and others, often produce inaccurate or unexpected results. For instance, Gemini depicted Nazi German soldiers as people of color, causing controversy and leading Google to pause image generation involving people in Gemini. Generative AI is also used in photo sleuthing, occasionally causing problems. Luther (2025) describes instances in which generative AI tools used in photo-sleuthing incorrectly identify individuals or fabricate historical matches when analyzing archival military images. These image-based hallucinations can lead to the spread of misinformation about historical figures, military records, and genealogical research.
Judges have been issuing sanctions.  Bar associations have been issuing warnings.  And in courtrooms across the country, lawyers have been caught submitting briefs containing citations to cases that never existed—ghost precedents conjured by AI tools that state falsehoods with quiet authority.  None of it has slowed down BigLaw's AI bet. If anything, the industry is doubling down.
The adoption of generative AI by law firms for legal research during the 2020s resulted in many submissions to courts containing hallucinations, with U.S. judges nationwide sanctioning or reprimanding lawyers. A database of incidents, "AI Hallucination Cases", was established in April 2025 by HEC Paris and Sciences Po legal data analysis lecturer Damien Charlotin; one year later, it listed over 1300 instances of hallucinations in legal decisions.
In May 2023, it was discovered that Stephen Schwartz had submitted six fake case precedents generated by ChatGPT in his brief to the Southern District of New York on Mata v. Avianca, Inc., a personal injury case against the airline Avianca. Schwartz said that he had never previously used ChatGPT, that he did not recognize the possibility that ChatGPT's output could have been fabricated, and that ChatGPT continued to assert the authenticity of the precedents after their nonexistence was discovered. In response, Brantley Starr of the Northern District of Texas banned the submission of AI-generated case filings that have not been reviewed by a human, noting that:
Generative AI platforms in their current states are prone to hallucinations and bias. On hallucinations, they make stuff up—even quotes and citations. Another issue is reliability or bias. While attorneys swear an oath to set aside their personal prejudices, biases, and beliefs to faithfully uphold the law and represent their clients, generative artificial intelligence is the product of programming devised by humans who did not have to swear such an oath. As such, these systems hold no allegiance to any client, the rule of law, or the laws and Constitution of the United States (or, as addressed above, the truth). Unbound by any sense of duty, honor, or justice, such programs act according to computer code rather than conviction, based on programming rather than principle.On 23 June 2023, judge P. Kevin Castel dismissed the Mata case and issued a $5,000 fine to Schwartz and another lawyer—who had both continued to stand by the fictitious precedents despite Schwartz's previous claims—for bad faith conduct. Castel characterized numerous errors and inconsistencies in the opinion summaries, describing one of the cited opinions as "gibberish" and "[bordering] on nonsensical".
In May 2025, high-profile pro se plaintiff Ashley Gjøvik, who has a Juris Doctor from Santa Clara University School of Law, was admonished in U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California (USNDC)  by Judge Edward Chen for the inclusion of multiple AI hallucinations in her whistleblower retaliation and wrongful termination case against Apple Inc., Gjovik v. Apple Inc., warning that future instances would result in Gjøvik being held in contempt of court and her pro se privileges revoked. The case is foundational in  Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 11 regarding professional conduct cited repeatedly by other judges as the operative standard. It has also been discussed by the American Bar Association in updating the model professional rules and cited in its opinion regarding the use of generative AI.
In September 2025, USNDC Magistrate Judge Peter Kang sanctioned Webb Law attorney Katherine Cervantes for her submission of July 21 that included an AI hallucination which she stated had been obtained from Westlaw AI, the Thomson Reuters' artificial intelligence tool. On April 28, 2026, Judge Kang sanctioned and fined Webb Law Group managing partner Lenden Webb for insufficient supervision of Cervantes—a junior lawyer incorporating AI for the first time—therefore allowing  the legal submission that included an AI hallucinated citation of July 21, 2025.
On 18 March 2026, Clayton County, Georgia, Assistant District Attorney Deborah Leslie appeared before the Supreme Court of Georgia to deliver oral arguments regarding an order to deny an appeal for a murder conviction, which a Clayton County Superior Court judge used in denying the defendant's motion. During the session, Chief Justice Nels S. D. Peterson noted at least five fictitious citations within the filing, as well as five others that did not support the proposition for which they were cited. On 30 March 2026, Leslie admitted in an affidavit to not verifying AI-generated "expanded legal research" used to prepare the order, which District Attorney Tasha Mosley corroborated in a written apology to Peterson. On 5 May, the Supreme Court vacated the lower court's ruling and ordered for a new order with legitimate citations to be written. Leslie was also suspended from practicing before the Supreme Court for six months and was ordered to take additional education for ethics and proper use of artificial intelligence.
In April 2026, Sullivan & Cromwell submitted an apology to the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York, following Boies Schiller Flexner's discovery of hallucinated legal citations that the opposing legal team had submitted to the court on behalf of client Prince Global Holdings Limited.
On 28 April 2026, U.S. Magistrate Judge Robert T. Numbers formally reprimanded former assistant U.S. attorney Rudy Renfer for having submitted a brief to the court containing fabricated quotes and false legal citations the previous month, after which Renfer was fired from his position at the United States District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina where he had served for 17 years.
As of 14 June 2026, Canadian courts and tribunals have received at least 167 filings containing AI-hallucinated, fictitious citations, across 51 courts and tribunals. On 9 June 2026, the Chief Justice of Canada, the Right Honourable Richard Wagner, P.C., stated that AI is present in courtrooms "in ways both promising and problematic".
As of August 2026, Israeli courts and tribunals had identified at least 55 cases in which parties submitted documents containing fictitious citations or otherwise AI-hallucinated arguments. On February 2025, the Israeli High Court of Justice warned litigants that further incidents of this kind would attract sanctions such as personal cost orders or disciplinary proceedings before the Bar. The emerging Israeli case law on AI hallucinations also included instances in which police prosecutors and municipal authorities relied on fictitious statutory provisions.
The High Court of Justice criticised the use of generative AI-based pleadings with hallucinated authorities in the conjoined 2025 case of Ayinde v Haringey and Al-Haroun v Qatar. In addition, the UK's First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal has dealt with a number of cases where litigants have generated hallucinated legal citations.
Legal professional bodies have put out guidance on the use of AI including the Solicitors Regulation Authority, the Law Society of England and Wales, and the Bar Council.
There are many noted instances of LLMs citing sources that are either incorrect or do not exist. A 2023 study conducted in the Cureus Journal of Medical Science showed that out of 178 total references cited by GPT-3, 69 returned an incorrect or nonexistent digital object identifier (DOI). An additional 28 had no known DOI nor could be located in a Google search.
Another instance was documented in 2023 by Jerome Goddard from Mississippi State University. In an experiment, ChatGPT had provided questionable information about ticks. Unsure about the validity of the response, they inquired about the source that the information had been gathered from. Upon looking at the source, it was apparent that the DOI and the names of the authors had been hallucinated. Some of the authors were contacted and confirmed that they had no knowledge of the paper's existence whatsoever. Goddard says that, "in [ChatGPT's] current state of development, physicians and biomedical researchers should NOT ask ChatGPT for sources, references, or citations on a particular topic. Or, if they do, all such references should be carefully vetted for accuracy." The use of these language models is not ready for fields of academic research and that their use should be handled carefully.
Nina Schick said that the persuasive quality of hallucinated content generated by AI systems poses risks to democratic institutions by enabling the spread of convincing but false narratives. She said, "The core risk to democracy is a future in which AI is used as an engine to power all information and knowledge-consequently degrading trust in the medium of digital information itself." She said that the rapid proliferation of generative AI may challenge public trust by blurring the boundaries between verified information and synthetic misinformation.
On top of providing incorrect or missing reference material, ChatGPT also has issues with hallucinating the contents of some reference material. A study that analyzed a total of 115 references provided by ChatGPT-3.5 documented that 47% of them were fabricated. Another 46% cited real references but extracted incorrect information from them. Only the remaining 7% of references were cited correctly and provided accurate information. ChatGPT has also been observed to "double-down" on a lot of the incorrect information. When asked about a mistake that may have been hallucinated, sometimes ChatGPT will try to correct itself but other times it will claim the response is correct and provide even more misleading information.
These hallucinated articles generated by language models also pose an issue because it is difficult to tell whether an article was generated by an AI. To show this, a group of researchers at the Northwestern University of Chicago generated 50 abstracts based on existing reports and analyzed their originality. Plagiarism detectors gave the generated articles an originality score of 100%, meaning that the information presented appears to be completely original. Other software designed to detect AI generated text was only able to correctly identify these generated articles with an accuracy of 66%. Research scientists had a similar rate of human error, identifying these abstracts at a rate of 68%. From this information, the authors of this study concluded, "[t]he ethical and acceptable boundaries of ChatGPT's use in scientific writing remain unclear, although some publishers are beginning to lay down policies." Because of AI's ability to fabricate research undetected, the use of AI in the field of research will make determining the originality of research more difficult and require new policies regulating its use in the future.
Given the ability of AI generated language to pass as real scientific research in some cases, AI hallucinations present problems for the application of language models in the academic and scientific fields of research due to their ability to be undetectable when presented to real researchers. The high likelihood of returning non-existent reference material and incorrect information may require limitations to be put in place regarding these language models. Some say that rather than hallucinations, these events are more akin to "fabrications" and "falsifications" and that the use of these language models presents a risk to the integrity of the field as a whole.
Some academic professionals who support scholarly research, such as academic librarians, have observed a significant increase in workload related to verifying the accuracy of references. Zoë Teel said in a 2023 paper that universities may need to resort to implementing their own citation auditing in order to track the problem of fictitious references.
Some nonexistent phrases such as "vegetative electron microscopy" have appeared in many research papers as a result of having become embedded in AI training data.
At the University of Washington, David Baker's lab has used AI hallucinations to design millions of proteins that do not occur in nature, leading to roughly 100 patents and the founding of over 20 biotech companies. This work contributed to Baker receiving the 2024 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, although the committee avoided using the "hallucinations" language.
At California Institute of Technology, researchers used hallucinations to design a catheter that reduces bacterial contamination. The design features sawtooth-like spikes on the inner walls that prevent bacteria from gaining traction, potentially reducing the number of urinary tract infections. These scientific applications of hallucinations differ fundamentally from chatbot hallucinations, as they are grounded in physical reality and scientific facts rather than ambiguous language or internet data. Anima Anandkumar, a professor at Caltech, emphasizes that these AI models are "taught physics" and their outputs must be validated through rigorous testing. In meteorology, scientists use AI to generate thousands of subtle forecast variations, helping identify unexpected factors that can influence extreme weather events.
At Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, researchers have applied hallucinatory techniques to enhance blurry medical images, while the University of Texas at Austin has utilized them to improve robot navigation systems.
Hallucinations, when constrained by scientific methodology, can significantly accelerate the discovery process.
Artificial intelligence hallucinations can impact education. There has been a rise in students using AI tools for assistance in research or writing tools such as Grammarly or using generative AI programs such as ChatGPT. This has raised concern regarding academic integrity in submitted projects in addition to hallucinations causing students to learn incorrect information.
Part of this concern lies in the citations provided by LLMs and generative AI. A 2024 study at the University of Mississippi found that many of these citations that students submitted were partially or completely fabricated. 47% of these sources either had incorrect titles, dates, authors, or a combination of all. The study notes that these inconsistencies in student-submitted citations cause educators and librarians to manually check the accuracy more frequently.
The Journal of Cranio-Maxillofacial Surgery addresses this risk when it comes to the medical and surgical fields. They mention how academic publishers have acknowledged the issue, and that some journals such as JAMA have changed some of their policies to discourage the use of AI-generated citations. Although the journal states that a policy will not be enough to diminish the use of AI-generated citations, automatic tools to check the citations and AI literacy training should also be adopted.
Instructors may use tools such as Turnitin for plagiarism checking and verification of academic integrity. These tools have been found to sometimes flag papers that have not used any AI assistance in their writing. OpenAI has also found such a lack of accuracy in their own AI detection software that the company shut it down entirely.
As of 2025, there is still ongoing research to try to mitigate the occurrence of hallucinations. Research in 2022 has shown that language models not only hallucinate but also amplify hallucinations, even for those which were designed to alleviate this issue. Researchers from OpenAI wrote that hallucinations occur because the training and evaluation of LLMs reward guessing over acknowledging uncertainty, and proposed modifying the scoring of benchmarks.
Researchers have proposed a variety of mitigation measures, including getting different chatbots to debate one another until they reach consensus on an answer and neuro-symbolic architectures with formal knowledge bases and inference engines.
Ji et al. divide common mitigation methods into two categories: data-related methods and modeling and inference methods. Data-related methods include building a faithful dataset, cleaning data automatically, and information augmentation by augmenting the inputs with external information. Model and inference methods include changes in the architecture (either modifying the encoder, attention, or the decoder in various ways); changes in the training process, such as using reinforcement learning; and post-processing methods that can correct hallucinations in the output.
Nvidia Guardrails, launched in 2023, can be configured to hard-code certain responses via script instead of leaving them to the LLM. Furthermore, tools such as the Trustworthy Language Model have been created to attempt to aid in the detection of hallucination.
Evaluating multiple possible replies before answering a query by assigning confidence scores to each could mitigate the problem. However, this approach would multiply computational costs. Active learning would further increase these costs. In high-stakes domains such as chip design, supply chain logistics, and medical diagnostics, the added costs would be operationally necessary in order for LLMs to be used. In chatbots, however, customers tend to prefer rapid, overconfident answers over cautious, uncertainty-aware ones.
The Artificial Intelligence Act (AI Act) is a European Union regulation concerning artificial intelligence (AI). It establishes a common regulatory and legal framework for AI within the European Union (EU). The regulation entered into force on 1 August 2024, with provisions that shall come into operation gradually over the following 6 to 36 months.
It covers most AI systems across a wide range of sectors, with exemptions for AI used only for military, national security, research purposes, or for non-professional use. As a form of product regulation, it does not create individual rights; instead, it places duties on AI providers and on organisations that use AI in a professional context.
The Act classifies non-exempt AI applications by their risk of causing harm. There are four levels – unacceptable, high, limited, minimal – plus an additional category for general-purpose AI.
For general-purpose AI, transparency requirements are imposed, with reduced requirements for open source models, and additional evaluations for high-capability models.
The Act also creates a European Artificial Intelligence Board to promote national cooperation and ensure compliance with the regulation. Like the EU's General Data Protection Regulation, the Act can apply extraterritorially to providers from outside the EU if they have users within the EU.
Proposed by the European Commission on 21 April 2021, it passed the European Parliament on 13 March 2024, and was unanimously approved by the EU Council on 21 May 2024. The draft Act was revised to address the rise in popularity of generative AI systems, such as ChatGPT, whose general-purpose capabilities did not fit the main framework.
There are different risk categories depending on the type of application, with a specific category dedicated to general-purpose generative AI:
The risk-based scheme follows a product-safety model in which regulatory duties are assigned to the providers and deployers of AI systems, and these duties become more demanding as the potential impact on health, safety, or fundamental rights increases. This structure is meant to ensure that oversight focuses on systems likely to create significant risks while allowing lighter approaches for uses considered less sensitive. Some legal scholars also argue that, in practice, the Act frames "trustworthy AI" as systems that can show compliance with these safety and risk thresholds. According to an initial appraisal by the European Parliamentary Research Service, the Commission's impact assessment drew on stakeholder consultations and a wide range of existing research when comparing policy options for this risk-based framework.
Added in 2023, the general-purpose AI category includes foundation models (for example, ChatGPT) that can perform a wide range of tasks. If a model's weights and design are made open source, developers must publish a training data summary and a copyright policy; closed-source models must meet broader transparency requirements. High-impact models that pose systemic risks (require more than 1025 floating-point operations to train) must undergo extra evaluation. A General-Purpose AI Code of Practice, published on 10 July 2025, outlines three main chapters on transparency, copyright, and safety and security to help providers demonstrate compliance with the AI Act. Participation in the code is voluntary.
Beyond these basic transparency duties, the Act sets a common list of obligations for providers of general-purpose AI models. They must publish a summary of the training data, adopt a policy to comply with copyright law, and provide technical documentation to downstream providers and supervisory authorities. Models that are designated as posing systemic risk must also carry out model evaluations and adversarial testing, assess and mitigate risks such as bias and security failures, report serious incidents, and ensure an adequate level of cybersecurity.
Articles 2.3 and 2.6 exempt AI systems used for military or national security purposes or pure scientific research and development from the AI Act. In particular, the Regulation does not apply where AI systems are used exclusively for military, defence or national security purposes, or to systems developed and put into service solely for scientific research and development; if such systems are later used for other purposes (for example, civilian or law-enforcement uses), the Act applies. These activities remain governed by separate EU and national rules on defence, security, and intelligence rather than by the AI Act itself.
Article 5.2 bans algorithmic video surveillance of people ("The use of 'real-time' remote biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces") only if it is conducted in real time. Exceptions allowing real-time algorithmic video surveillance include policing aims including "a real and present or real and foreseeable threat of terrorist attack".
Recital 31 of the Act states that it aims to prohibit "AI systems providing social scoring of natural persons by public or private actors", but allows for "lawful evaluation practices of natural persons that are carried out for a specific purpose in accordance with Union and national law." La Quadrature du Net interprets this exemption as permitting sector-specific social scoring systems, such as the suspicion score used by the French family payments agency Caisse d'allocations familiales.
The AI Act establishes various new bodies in Article 64 and the following articles. These bodies are tasked with implementing and enforcing the Act. The approach combines EU-level coordination with national implementation, involving both public authorities and private sector participation.
The following bodies have been established:
While the establishment of new bodies is planned at the EU level, Member States will have to designate "national competent authorities".[note 1] These authorities will be responsible for ensuring the application and implementation of the AI Act, and for conducting "market surveillance". They will verify that AI systems comply with the regulations, notably by checking the proper performance of conformity assessments and by appointing third-parties to carry out external conformity assessments.
Once harmonised standards for the AI Act are published in the Official Journal, compliant products are presumed to conform with the regulation; these standards are being drafted by CEN/CENELEC Joint Technical Committee 21 (JTC 21).
The Act regulates entry to the EU internal market using the New Legislative Framework. It contains essential requirements that all AI systems must meet to access the EU market. These essential requirements are passed on to European Standardisation Organisations, which develop technical standards that further detail these requirements. These standards are developed by CEN/CENELEC JTC 21.
The Act mandates that member states establish their own notifying bodies. Conformity assessments are conducted to verify whether AI systems comply with the standards set out in the AI Act. This assessment can be done in two ways: either through self-assessment, where the AI system provider checks conformity, or through third-party conformity assessment, where the notifying body conducts the assessment. Notifying bodies also have the authority to carry out audits to ensure proper conformity assessments.
Each EU Member State must also designate a national supervisory authority to monitor compliance, handle complaints, and share information with the European AI Office, which coordinates enforcement across the Union.
Together, these actors form a multi-level supervision system. National market surveillance and supervisory authorities carry out checks and enforce the rules on high-risk AI systems and other regulated uses, while EU-level bodies such as the AI Office and the European Artificial Intelligence Board support implementation of the Act and help ensure consistent application, in particular for general-purpose AI models.
Criticism has arisen regarding the fact that many high-risk AI systems do not require third-party conformity assessments. Some commentators argue that independent third-party assessments are necessary for high-risk AI systems to ensure safety before deployment. Legal scholars have suggested that AI systems capable of generating deepfakes for political misinformation or creating non-consensual intimate imagery should be classified as high-risk and subjected to stricter regulation. However, the Act does not explicitly mandate specific deepfake detection mechanisms, nor does it comprehensively address the broader human rights implications stemming from the proliferation of such synthetic media. Scholars have further argued that manufacturer self-assessments are inadequate to address complex generative harms, necessitating mandatory architectural mandates and standardized verification frameworks to ensure effective enforcement.
Non-compliance with the prohibitions in Article 5 is subject to administrative fines of up to EUR 35,000,000 or, if the offender is an undertaking, up to 7% of its total worldwide annual turnover, whichever is higher. Other operator obligations may be sanctioned with fines of up to EUR 15,000,000 or 3% of worldwide annual turnover, whichever is higher; providing incorrect, incomplete or misleading information may be fined up to EUR 7,500,000 or 1% of worldwide annual turnover. For SMEs, including start-ups, the applicable cap is the lower of the relevant percentage or the fixed amount. For providers of general-purpose AI models, the Commission may impose separate fines up to EUR 15,000,000 or 3% of worldwide annual turnover in the specific cases listed in Article 101.
The Act provides for "regulatory sandboxes", i.e., controlled testing environments run by national competent authorities, where developers can trial AI systems under supervision before placing them on the market, to support innovation while maintaining safeguards. Member States are encouraged to set up such sandboxes under coordinated EU rules, and small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and start-ups may receive priority access to test systems in a compliant setting.
In February 2020, the European Commission published "White Paper on Artificial Intelligence – A European approach to excellence and trust". In October 2020, debates between EU leaders took place in the European Council. On 21 April 2021, the AI Act was officially proposed by the Commission. On 6 December 2022, the European Council adopted the general orientation, allowing negotiations to begin with the European Parliament. On 9 December 2023, after three days of "marathon" talks, the EU Council and Parliament concluded an agreement.
The law was passed in the European Parliament on 13 March 2024, when MEPs adopted the final text in plenary session by a vote of 523 for, 46 against, and 49 abstaining. It was approved by the EU Council on 21 May 2024. It entered into force on 1 August 2024, 20 days after being published in the Official Journal on 12 July 2024. After coming into force, there will be a delay before it becomes applicable, which depends on the type of application. This delay is 6 months for bans on "unacceptable risk" AI systems, 9 months for codes of practice, 12 months for general-purpose AI systems, 36 months for some obligations related to "high-risk" AI systems, and 24 months for everything else.
Legal commentators have described the AI Act as a first-of-its-kind, comprehensive framework for regulating AI across multiple sectors, and as a likely reference point for companies and regulators outside the EU when they design their own approaches to AI governance.
Experts have argued that though the jurisdiction of the law is European, it could have far-ranging implications for international companies that plan to expand to Europe. Anu Bradford at Columbia has argued that the law provides significant momentum to the world-wide movement to regulate AI technologies.
Amnesty International stated that, while EU policymakers present the AI Act as a global model for AI regulation, the legislation fails to take basic human rights principles into account and offers only limited protections to impacted and marginalised people. It argued that the Act does not ban the reckless use and export of what it calls "draconian AI technologies", fails to ensure equal protection for migrants, refugees and asylum seekers, and lacks adequate accountability and transparency provisions, which in its view risks exacerbating human rights abuses.
Some tech watchdogs have argued that there were major loopholes in the law that would allow large tech monopolies to entrench their advantage in AI, or to lobby to weaken rules. Some startups welcomed the clarification the Act provides, while others argued the additional regulation would make European startups uncompetitive compared to American and Chinese startups. Legal analysis has also suggested that, while the Act may serve as an early reference point for AI governance frameworks, its detailed requirements could add significant compliance complexity for providers operating across multiple jurisdictions. La Quadrature du Net (LQDN) described the AI Act as "tailor-made for the tech industry, European police forces as well as other large bureaucracies eager to automate social control." LQDN described the role of self-regulation and exemptions in the Act as rendering it "largely incapable of standing in the way of the social, political and environmental damage linked to the proliferation of AI." In light of environmental concerns, some scholars have also argued that the Act's high-risk categorization framework fails to account for the environmental impacts of AI systems, including the energy consumption and resource demands associated with large-scale model training and deployment. They contend that by focusing primarily on fundamental rights and product safety risks, the regulation overlooks sustainability concerns and the climate implications of expanding AI infrastructures. Commentary on national security has also noted that the Act's sectoral exclusion for security and defense sits alongside separate security frameworks, raising questions about how these exemptions will interact with future security and defense policy. Academic commentary has described the Act as a "medley" of product-safety and fundamental-rights frameworks and has also cautioned that its product-safety approach relies heavily on provider self-assessment, raising concerns about effective enforcement. An initial appraisal of the Commission's impact assessment by the European Parliamentary Research Service likewise noted that much of the analysis is qualitative and that some estimates, including for compliance costs under the different options, depend on modelling assumptions and available evidence. Some scholars also note that linking "trustworthy AI" to compliance with these risk thresholds can make the underlying policy choices about what levels of risk are acceptable less visible. Separate proposals for algorithmic impact assessments, such as a framework developed by the AI Now Institute for public agencies, argue that impact assessments should map affected communities, examine fairness, bias and due process, and allow ongoing public and researcher scrutiny of automated decision systems.
A broad civil society coalition coordinated by European Digital Rights (EDRi) published a joint analysis comparing the final AI Act with its earlier demands and concluded that the law falls short of what is needed to protect rights to privacy, equality, non-discrimination and the presumption of innocence. The coalition also called for stronger safeguards for people on the move and for people with disabilities, arguing that the final rules leave significant gaps in these areas.
Organisations representing authors, performers, publishers and producers have also criticised the implementation of the Act, particularly its rules for general-purpose AI. A joint statement from 38 global creators' organisations, reported by Le Monde, argued that the Code of Practice, the guidelines for general-purpose AI and the template for training-data summaries under Article 53 do not adequately protect intellectual property rights or ensure sufficient transparency about the data used to train generative AI models, describing the outcome as a missed opportunity to deliver on the Act's stated goals. This criticism has been discussed as part of wider debates about how the AI Act and its general-purpose AI provisions may affect the position of cultural and creative industries in the EU.
Building on these critiques, scholars have raised concerns in particular about the Act's approach to regulating the secondary uses of trained AI models, which may have significant societal impacts. They argue that the Act's narrow focus on deployment contexts and reliance on providers to self-declare intended purposes creates opportunities for misinterpretation and insufficient oversight. Additionally, the Act often exempts open-source models and neglects critical lifecycle phases, such as the reuse of trained models. Trained models store decision-mappings as parameters that approximate patterns from the training data. This "model data" is distinct from the original training data and is typically classified as non-personal, as it often cannot be traced back to individual data subjects. Consequently, it falls outside the scope of other regulations like the GDPR. Some scholars also criticize the AI Act for not sufficiently regulating the reuse of model data, warning of potentially harmful consequences for individual privacy, social equity, and democratic processes. Other commentators have also questioned the democratic legitimacy, transparency, and practical enforceability of the new rules for general-purpose AI, noting that their impact will depend on how oversight bodies apply them over time.
Legal scholars have argued that compliance-based frameworks such as the EU AI Act may be insufficient to prevent harm, as optimizing systems can satisfy formal requirements while producing prohibited outcomes — a phenomenon described as the 'Synthetic Outlaw' problem, in which the gap between nominal compliance and actual impact remains ungoverned.
This glossary of artificial intelligence is a list of definitions of terms and concepts relevant to the study of artificial intelligence (AI), its subdisciplines, and related fields. Related glossaries include Glossary of computer science, Glossary of robotics, Glossary of machine vision, and Glossary of logic.
Pronounced "A-star".Also abduction.Also adaptive network-based fuzzy inference system.Also artificial emotional intelligence or emotion AI.Also fuzzy string searching.Also argumentation system.Also machine intelligence.Also simply AI planning.Also self-driving car, robot car, and driverless car.Also backward reasoning.Also stochastic Hopfield network with hidden units.Also propositional satisfiability problem; abbreviated SATISFIABILITY or SAT.Also bagging or bootstrapping.Also self-learning know-how system.Also exhaustive search or generate and test.Also smartbot, talkbot, chatterbot, bot, IM bot, interactive agent, conversational interface, or artificial conversational entity.Also clustering.Also artificial creativity, mechanical creativity, creative computing, or creative computation.Also theoretical neuroscience or mathematical neuroscience.Also algorithmic number theory.Also statistical computing.Also conlang.Also recombination.Also dataset.Also enterprise data warehouse (EDW).Also theory of choice.Also epigenetic robotics.Also conversational agent (CA).Also dimension reduction.Also decentralized artificial intelligence.Also dilution.Also interface agent.Also representation learning.Also first-order predicate calculus or predicate logic.Also forward reasoning.Also friendly AI or FAI.Also graph search.Also cognitive augmentation, machine augmented intelligence, and enhanced intelligence.Also virtual assistant or personal digital assistant.Also logic tree.Also Clique Tree.aka lethal autonomous weapon system (LAWS), autonomous weapon system (AWS), robotic weapon, or killer robotAlso mathematical programming.Also computer audition (CA).Also mechatronic engineering.Also self-organized system.Also entity identification, entity chunking, and entity extraction.Also brain–computer interface (BCI), neural-control interface (NCI), mind-machine interface (MMI), direct neural interface (DNI), or brain–machine interface (BMI).Also neuromorphic computing.Also non-deterministic polynomial-time hardness.Also Ockham's razor or Ocham's razor.Also ontology extraction, ontology generation, or ontology acquisition.Also pathing.Also first-order logic, predicate logic, and first-order predicate calculus.Also rationality principle.Also propositional logic, statement logic, sentential calculus, sentential logic, and zeroth-order logic.Also random decision forest.Also known as a reasoning language model (RLM) or large reasoning model (LRM).Also frame network.Also reasoning engine, rules engine, or simply reasoner.Also weak supervision.Also simply SLD resolution.Also sparse coding or SDL.Also simply the singularity.Abbreviated H+ or h+.Also tree search.Also narrow AI. A superintelligence is a hypothetical agent that possesses intelligence surpassing that of the most gifted human minds. Philosopher Nick Bostrom defines superintelligence as "any intellect that greatly exceeds the cognitive performance of humans in virtually all domains of interest".
Technological researchers disagree about how likely present-day human intelligence is to be surpassed. Some argue that advances in artificial intelligence (AI) will probably result in general reasoning systems that lack human cognitive limitations. Others believe that humans will evolve or directly modify their biology to achieve radically greater intelligence. Several future study scenarios combine elements from both of these possibilities, suggesting that humans are likely to interface with computers, or upload their minds to computers, in a way that enables substantial intelligence amplification. The hypothetical creation of the first superintelligence may or may not result from an intelligence explosion or a technological singularity.
Some researchers believe that superintelligence will likely follow shortly after the development of artificial general intelligence. The first generally intelligent machines are likely to immediately hold an enormous advantage in at least some forms of mental capability, including the capacity of perfect recall, a vastly superior knowledge base, and the ability to multitask in ways not possible to biological entities.
Several scientists and forecasters have been arguing for prioritizing early research into the possible benefits and risks of human and machine cognitive enhancement, because of the potential social impact of such technologies.
Philosopher David Chalmers argues that artificial general intelligence is a very likely path to artificial superintelligence (ASI). Chalmers breaks this claim down into an argument that AI can achieve equivalence to human intelligence, that it can be extended to surpass human intelligence, and that it can be further amplified to completely dominate humans across arbitrary tasks.
Concerning human-level equivalence, Chalmers argues that the human brain is a mechanical system, and therefore ought to be emulatable by synthetic materials. He also notes that human intelligence was able to biologically evolve, making it more likely that human engineers will be able to recapitulate this invention. Evolutionary algorithms, in particular, should be able to produce human-level AI. Concerning intelligence extension and amplification, Chalmers argues that new AI technologies can generally be improved on, and that this is particularly likely when the invention can assist in designing new technologies.
An AI system capable of self-improvement could enhance its own intelligence, thereby becoming more efficient at improving itself. This cycle of "recursive self-improvement" might cause an intelligence explosion, resulting in the creation of a superintelligence.
Computer components already greatly surpass human performance in speed. Bostrom writes, "Biological neurons operate at a peak speed of about 200 Hz, a full seven orders of magnitude slower than a modern microprocessor (~2 GHz)." Moreover, neurons transmit spike signals across axons at no greater than 120 m/s, "whereas existing electronic processing cores can communicate optically at the speed of light". Thus, the simplest example of a superintelligence may be an emulated human mind running on much faster hardware than the brain. A human-like reasoner who could think millions of times faster than current humans would have a dominant advantage in most reasoning tasks, particularly ones that require haste or long strings of actions.
Another advantage of computers is modularity, that is, their size or computational capacity can be increased. A non-human (or modified human) brain could become much larger than a present-day human brain, like many supercomputers. Bostrom also raises the possibility of collective superintelligence: a large enough number of separate reasoning systems, if they communicated and coordinated well enough, could act in aggregate with far greater capabilities than any sub-agent.
Humans outperform non-human animals in large part because of new or enhanced reasoning capacities, such as long-term planning and language use. (See evolution of human intelligence and primate cognition.) If there are other possible improvements to reasoning that would have a similarly large impact, this makes it more likely that an agent can be built that outperforms humans in the same fashion humans outperform chimpanzees.
The above advantages hold for artificial superintelligence, but it is not clear how many hold for biological superintelligence. Physiological constraints limit the speed and size of biological brains in many ways that are inapplicable to machine intelligence. As such, writers on superintelligence have devoted much more attention to superintelligent AI scenarios.
In September 2026, United States president Donald Trump said that all US federal agency documents would refer to artificial intelligence as super intelligence or SI due to the word artificial having a connotation of "fake".[relevant?] The U.S. State Department subsequently ordered its international diplomats to use super intelligence instead of artificial intelligence, and Trump later signed an executive order requiring all US federal agencies to use the new term; the order is non-enforcable outside the US federal executive branch. Tech marketing experts predicted that the rebrand was unlikely to be adopted by the wider community due to the established meaning of superintelligence.
In 2024, Ilya Sutskever left OpenAI to cofound the startup Safe Superintelligence, which focuses solely on creating a superintelligence that is safe by design, while avoiding "distraction by management overhead or product cycles". Despite still offering no product, the startup became valued at $30 billion in February 2025.
In 2025, Meta created Meta Superintelligence Labs, a new AI division led by Alexandr Wang.
In 2026, US senator Bernie Sanders and Congressman Greg Casar proposed the 19-page Ban Artificial Superintelligence Act, a bill that would halt prospective development of advanced AI and creation of superintelligence uncontrollable by humans until some Department of Artificial Intelligence, meant to provide strict oversight and testing of such research, was created at the Cabinet level. Several precusors were defined for superintelligence development, including recursive self-improvement.
Carl Sagan suggested that the advent of Caesarean sections and in vitro fertilization may permit humans to evolve larger heads, resulting in improvements via natural selection in the heritable component of human intelligence. By contrast, Gerald Crabtree has argued that decreased selection pressure is resulting in a slow, centuries-long reduction in human intelligence and that this process instead is likely to continue. There is no scientific consensus concerning either possibility and in both cases, the biological change would be slow, especially relative to rates of cultural change.
Selective breeding, nootropics, epigenetic modulation, and genetic engineering could improve human intelligence more rapidly. Bostrom writes that if we come to understand the genetic component of intelligence, pre-implantation genetic diagnosis could be used to select for embryos with as much as 4 points of IQ gain (if one embryo is selected out of two), or with larger gains (e.g., up to 24.3 IQ points gained if one embryo is selected out of 1000). If this process is iterated over many generations, the gains could be an order of magnitude improvement. Bostrom suggests that deriving new gametes from embryonic stem cells could be used to iterate the selection process rapidly. A well-organized society of high-intelligence humans of this sort could potentially achieve collective superintelligence.
Alternatively, collective intelligence might be constructed by better organizing humans at present levels of individual intelligence. Several writers have suggested that human civilization, or some aspect of it (e.g., the Internet, or the economy), is coming to function like a global brain with capacities far exceeding its component agents. A prediction market is sometimes considered as an example of a working collective intelligence system, consisting of humans only (assuming algorithms are not used to inform decisions).
A final method of intelligence amplification would be to directly enhance individual humans, as opposed to enhancing their social or reproductive dynamics. This could be achieved using nootropics, somatic gene therapy, or brain−computer interfaces. However, Bostrom expresses skepticism about the scalability of the first two approaches and argues that designing a superintelligent cyborg interface is an AI-complete problem.
Most surveyed AI researchers expect machines to eventually be able to rival humans in intelligence, though there is little consensus on when this will likely happen.
In a 2022 survey, the median year by which respondents expected "High-level machine intelligence" with 50% confidence is 2061. The survey defined the achievement of high-level machine intelligence as when unaided machines can accomplish every task better and more cheaply than human workers.
In 2023, OpenAI leaders Sam Altman, Greg Brockman and Ilya Sutskever published recommendations for the governance of superintelligence, which they believe may happen in less than 10 years.
In 2025, the forecast scenario AI 2027 led by Daniel Kokotajlo predicted rapid progress in the automation of coding and AI research, followed by ASI. In September 2025, a review of surveys of scientists and industry experts from the last 15 years reported that most agreed that artificial general intelligence (AGI), a level well below technological singularity, will occur before the year 2100. A more recent analysis by AIMultiple reported that, “Current surveys of AI researchers are predicting AGI around 2040”.
Exploring the potential motivations of an artificial superintelligence, Bostrom distinguishes final goals and instrumental goals. From the point of view of an agent, final goals are intrinsically valuable, whereas instrumental goals are only useful for attaining final goals. He proposed the "orthogonality thesis", which postulates that in principle, virtually any final goal can be combined with virtually any level of intelligence. Bostrom also introduced the concept of instrumental convergence, which postulates that certain instrumental goals (such as self-preservation, resource acquisition or cognitive enhancement) increase the probability of achieving final goals in a wide range of situations, and would thus likely be pursued by a broad spectrum of intelligent agents.
William MacAskill argued that aligning advanced AI with current human values could be catastrophic if those values are permanently locked in and humanity still has moral blind spots like slavery in the past.
One proposed approach focuses on system architecture, using a collective intelligence of human and AI agents to support transparency, scalable safety mechanisms, human oversight, and continued alignment as capabilities increase.
Several proposals for an ASI's final goals have been put forward:
Bostrom elaborates on these concepts:
instead of implementing humanity's coherent extrapolated volition, one could try to build an AI to do what is morally right, relying on the AI's superior cognitive capacities to figure out just which actions fit that description. We can call this proposal "moral rightness" (MR) ...
MR would also appear to have some disadvantages. It relies on the notion of "morally right", a notoriously difficult concept, one with which philosophers have grappled since antiquity without yet attaining consensus as to its analysis. Picking an erroneous explication of "moral rightness" could result in outcomes that would be morally very wrong ...
One might try to preserve the basic idea of the MR model while reducing its demandingness by focusing on moral permissibility: the idea being that we could let the AI pursue humanity's CEV so long as it did not act in morally impermissible ways. 
Generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) is a subfield of artificial intelligence (AI) that uses generative models to generate text, images, videos, audio, computer code or other forms of digital data. These models learn the underlying patterns and structures of their training data, and use them to generate new data in response to input, which often takes the form of natural language prompts.
The prevalence of generative AI tools has increased significantly since the AI boom of the early 2020s. This boom was made possible by improvements in deep neural networks, particularly large language models (LLMs), which are based on the transformer architecture. Generative AI applications include chatbots such as ChatGPT, Claude, Microsoft Copilot, DeepSeek, Doubao, Google Gemini, Grok, Kimi and Qwen; text-to-image models such as DALL-E, Firefly, Stable Diffusion, and Midjourney; and text-to-video models such as Veo, LTX and Sora.
Companies in a variety of sectors have used or proposed the use of generative AI, including those in software development, healthcare, finance, entertainment, sales and marketing, screenwriting, and product design.
Generative AI has been used for cybercrime, and to deceive and manipulate people through fake news and deepfakes. Generative AI models have been trained on copyrighted works without the rightholders' permission. Many generative AI systems are reliant on large-scale data centers, whose environmental impacts include electronic waste, consumption of fresh water for cooling, and high energy consumption that is estimated to be growing steadily.
The origins of algorithmically generated media can be traced to the development of the Markov chain, which has been used to model natural language since the early 20th century. Russian mathematician Andrey Markov introduced the concept in 1906, including an analysis of vowel and consonant patterns in Eugene Onegin. Once trained on a text corpus, a Markov chain can generate probabilistic text.
By the early 1970s, artists began using computers to extend generative techniques beyond Markov models. Harold Cohen developed and exhibited works produced by AARON, a pioneering computer program designed to autonomously create paintings.
The terms generative AI planning or generative planning were used in the 1980s and 1990s to refer to AI planning systems, especially computer-aided process planning, used to generate sequences of actions to reach a specified goal. Generative AI planning systems used symbolic AI methods such as state space search and constraint satisfaction and were a "relatively mature" technology by the early 1990s. They were used to generate crisis action plans for military use, process plans for manufacturing and decision plans such as in prototype autonomous spacecraft.
Machine learning uses both discriminative models and generative models to predict or generate data. Beginning in the late 2000s and early 2010s, advances in deep learning led to major improvements in image classification, speech recognition, and natural language processing. Neural networks in this period were typically trained as discriminative models due to the relative difficulty of training generative models.
In 2014, the introduction of models such as the variational autoencoder (VAE) and generative adversarial network (GAN) enabled effective deep generative modeling of complex data such as images. In 2017, the paper "Attention Is All You Need" proposed that transformer architecture could enable further advances in generative modeling compared to earlier long short-term memory (LSTM) networks. This led to the development of generative pre-trained transformer (GPT) models, beginning with GPT-1 in 2018.
In March 2020, the release of 15.ai, a free web application created by an anonymous MIT researcher that could generate convincing character voices using minimal training data, was one of the earliest publicly available uses for generative AI. The platform is credited as the first mainstream service for audio deepfakes.
In 2021, DALL-E, a closed-source transformer-based generative model developed by OpenAI, drew widespread attention to text-to-image generation.
Other projects, including open-source approaches such as VQGAN+CLIP and DALL·E Mini (later renamed Craiyon), made similar systems more accessible to the public.
Dream by Wombo was released at the end of 2021, followed by the releases of Midjourney and Stable Diffusion in 2022.
In November 2022, ChatGPT was released to the public. By 2023, it popularized generative AI for general-purpose text-based tasks.
In a 2024 survey by marketing research firm Ipsos, Asia–Pacific countries were significantly more optimistic than Western societies about generative AI and show higher adoption rates. Despite expressing concerns about privacy and the pace of change, 68% of Asia-Pacific respondents believed that AI was having a positive impact on the world, compared to 57% globally. According to a survey by SAS and Coleman Parkes Research, as of 2023, 83% of Chinese respondents were using the technology, exceeding both the global average of 54% and the U.S. rate of 65%. A UN report indicated that Chinese entities filed over 38,000 generative AI patents from 2014 to 2023, more than any other country. A 2024 survey by the Just So Soul social media app reported that 18% of respondents born after 2000 used generative AI "almost every day", and that over 60% of respondents like or love AI-generated content (AIGC), while less than 3% dislike or hate it.
By mid-2025, companies were increasingly abandoning generative AI pilot projects as they had difficulties with integration, data quality and unmet returns, leading analysts at Gartner and The Economist to characterize the period as entering the Gartner hype cycle's "trough of disillusionment" phase.
In an October 2025 survey by the Federal Reserve, one in four U.S. workers reported using generative AI at work during the previous month.
Generative artificial intelligence has been applied across multiple industries for content creation and automation. In healthcare, generative models are used for drug discovery and the generation of synthetic medical data to train diagnostic systems. In finance, they are used for report drafting, data generation, and customer service automation. Media and entertainment industries use generative systems for tasks such as music composition, script development, and image or video generation. Researchers and policymakers have raised concerns regarding accuracy, misuse, and impacts on academic and professional work.
Large language models (LLMs) are trained on tokenized text from large corpora and are capable of natural language processing, machine translation, and natural language generation.
LLMs can be used as foundation models for a variety of downstream tasks. They can also be trained on source code to generate programs from prompts.
Many applications combine large language models with external knowledge sources using retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), a technique in which relevant documents are retrieved at inference time and incorporated into the model's response. 
Generative AI has been integrated into content management and website publishing platforms, where large language models are used to generate text, assist with page composition, and automate website creation from natural language prompts. WordPress.com is one example of this application, incorporating generative AI into its website authoring workflow.
In 2016, DeepMind's WaveNet demonstrated that deep neural networks can generate raw audio waveforms. This enabled more realistic speech synthesis compared to earlier approaches. Subsequent systems such as Tacotron 2 demonstrated end-to-end neural text-to-speech generation.
Generative AI can be used to create visual art. Such systems are trained on image–text pairs. Examples include Stable Diffusion, DALL-E, and Midjourney.
Generative AI can be used to produce photorealistic videos. Systems such as Runway have demonstrated text-to-video generation capabilities.
Generative models can be used for motion planning and robot control by learning from prior data.
Generative models can assist in automating 3D modeling tasks, including generating 3D assets from text or images.[scientific citation needed]
Generative AI systems have been used in mathematics and computer science to generate candidate computer programs, proofs, constructions, or algorithms. 
In 2023, Google DeepMind introduced FunSearch, a method for creating computer programs that solve mathematical and algorithmic problems. FunSearch was used to discover new mathematical constructions in the  cap set problem and the bin packing problem.
In 2023, Google DeepMind introduced AlphaDev, which was used to discover small sorting algorithms that outperformed previously known human benchmarks and have been integrated into the LLVM standard C++ sorting library. In 2025, Google DeepMind introduced AlphaEvolve, an AI system for general-purpose algorithm discovery and optimization. AlphaEvolve uses LLMs to propose code changes, automated evaluators to assess each candidate, and an evolutionary process to iteratively improve algorithms.
In 2026, in response to the increasing use of generative AI in mathematical discovery, a group of mathematicians issued the Leiden Declaration on Artificial Intelligence and Mathematics, which recommends disclosing the use of AI in research papers, ensuring that AI-assisted papers are peer-reviewed, and providing legal resources and public funding so that academia and for-profit companies can compete on equal terms.
In 2023, Google DeepMind introduced GNoME, a method to propose candidate inorganic crystal structures for computational screening and experimental synthesis in material science. Other material science methods include MatterGen, CDVAE, and CrystalFlow.
Generative engine optimization (GEO) is the practice of structuring digital content and managing online presence to improve visibility in responses generated by generative AI systems. The practice influences the way large language models (LLMs) retrieve, summarize, and present information in response to user queries. Related terms include answer engine optimization (AEO) and artificial intelligence optimization (AIO).
Generative AI models are used by chatbots such as ChatGPT, programming tools such as GitHub Copilot, text-to-image programs such as Midjourney, and text-to-video programs such as Runway Gen-2. Generative AI features have been added to existing commercially available services such as Microsoft Office (Microsoft Copilot), Google Photos, and the Adobe Suite (Adobe Firefly). Many generative AI models are also available as open-source software, including Stable Diffusion and the LLaMA language model.
Smaller generative AI models with up to a few billion parameters can run on smartphones, embedded devices, and personal computers. For example, LLaMA-7B (a version with 7 billion parameters) can run on a Raspberry Pi 4 and one version of Stable Diffusion can run on an iPhone 11.
Larger models with tens of billions of parameters can run on laptop or desktop computers. To achieve an acceptable speed, models of this size may require accelerators such as the GPU chips produced by NVIDIA and AMD or the Neural Engine included in Apple silicon products. For example, the 65 billion parameter version of LLaMA can be configured to run on a desktop PC.
The advantages of running generative AI locally include protection of privacy and intellectual property, and avoidance of rate limiting and censorship. The subreddit r/LocalLLaMA in particular focuses on using consumer-grade gaming graphics cards through such techniques as compression.
Language models with hundreds of billions of parameters, such as GPT-4 or PaLM, typically run on datacenter computers equipped with arrays of GPUs (such as NVIDIA's H100) or AI accelerator chips (such as Google's TPU). These very large models are typically accessed as cloud services over the Internet.
In 2022, the United States New Export Controls on Advanced Computing and Semiconductors to China imposed restrictions on exports to China of GPU and AI accelerator chips used for generative AI. Chips such as the NVIDIA A800 and the Biren Technology BR104 were developed to meet the requirements of the sanctions.
There is free software on the market which attempts to recognizing text generated by generative artificial intelligence (such as GPTZero), as well as images, audio or video coming from it. Potential mitigation strategies for detecting generative AI content include digital watermarking, content authentication, information retrieval, and machine learning classifier models. Despite claims of accuracy, both free and paid AI text detectors have frequently produced false positives, mistakenly accusing students of submitting AI-generated work.
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are a generative modeling technique which consist of two neural networks—the generator and the discriminator—trained simultaneously in a competitive setting. The generator creates synthetic data by transforming random noise into samples that resemble the training dataset. The discriminator is trained to distinguish the authentic data from synthetic data produced by the generator. The two models engage in a minimax game: the generator aims to create increasingly realistic data to "fool" the discriminator, while the discriminator improves its ability to distinguish real from fake data. This continuous training setup enables the generator to produce high-quality and realistic outputs.
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) are deep learning models that probabilistically encode data. They are typically used for tasks such as noise reduction from images, data compression, identifying unusual patterns, and facial recognition. Unlike standard autoencoders, which compress input data into a fixed latent representation, VAEs model the latent space as a probability distribution, allowing for smooth sampling and interpolation between data points. The encoder ("recognition model") maps input data to a latent space, producing means and variances that define a probability distribution. The decoder ("generative model") samples from this latent distribution and attempts to reconstruct the original input.
The self-attention mechanism enables the model to determine the relative importance of each token in a sequence when predicting the next token, thereby improving contextual understanding. Unlike recurrent neural networks, transformers process tokens in parallel, which improves training efficiency and scalability.[non-primary source needed] Transformers became the foundation for the generative pre-trained transformer (GPT) series developed by OpenAI, replacing traditional recurrent and convolutional models.[citation needed]
In the United States, a group of companies including OpenAI, Alphabet, and Meta signed a voluntary agreement with the Biden administration in July 2023 to watermark AI-generated content. In October 2023, Executive Order 14110 applied the Defense Production Act to require all US companies to report information to the federal government when training certain high-impact AI models.
In the European Union (EU), the Artificial Intelligence Act includes requirements to disclose copyrighted material used to train generative AI systems, and to label any AI-generated output as such.
In China, the Interim Measures for the Management of Generative AI Services introduced by the Cyberspace Administration of China regulates any public-facing generative AI. It includes requirements to watermark generated images or videos, regulations on training data and label quality, restrictions on personal data collection, and a guideline that generative AI services must "adhere to socialist core values".
In 2021, UNESCO adopted the Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence, the first global standard-setting instrument on AI. It provides guidance to member states on issues including human rights, fairness, transparency, data governance, and environmental sustainability.
The Group of Seven (G7) launched the Hiroshima AI Process in 2023, which produced international guiding principles and a voluntary code of conduct for developers of advanced AI systems. In 2024, the Council of Europe adopted the Framework Convention on Artificial Intelligence and Human Rights, Democracy and the Rule of Law, the first legally binding international treaty governing artificial intelligence.
Generative AI systems such as ChatGPT and Midjourney are trained on large, publicly available datasets that include copyrighted works. AI developers have argued that such training is protected under fair use, while copyright holders have argued that it infringes their rights.
Proponents of fair use training have argued that it is a transformative use and does not involve making copies of copyrighted works available to the public. Critics have argued that image generators such as Midjourney can create nearly-identical copies of some copyrighted images, and that generative AI programs compete with the content they are trained on.
As of 2024, several lawsuits related to the use of copyrighted material in training are ongoing.
Getty Images has sued Stability AI over the use of its images to train Stable Diffusion. Both the Authors Guild and The New York Times have sued Microsoft and OpenAI over the use of their works to train ChatGPT.
A separate question is whether AI-generated works can qualify for copyright protection. The United States Copyright Office has ruled that works created by artificial intelligence without any human input cannot be copyrighted, because they lack human authorship. Some legal professionals have suggested that Naruto v. Slater (2018), in which the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals held that non-humans cannot be copyright holders of artistic works, could be a potential precedent in copyright litigation over works created by generative AI. However, the office has also begun taking public input to determine if these rules need to be refined for generative AI.
In January 2025, the United States Copyright Office (USCO) released extensive guidance regarding the use of AI tools in the creative process, and established that "...generative AI systems also offer tools that similarly allow users to exert control. [These] can enable the user to control the selection and placement of individual creative elements. Whether such modifications rise to the minimum standard of originality required under Feist will depend on a case-by-case determination. In those cases where they do, the output should be copyrightable" Subsequently, the USCO registered the first visual artwork to be composed of entirely AI-generated materials, titled "A Single Piece of American Cheese".
The development of generative AI has raised concerns from governments, businesses, and individuals, resulting in protests, legal actions, calls to pause AI experiments, and actions by multiple governments. In a July 2023 briefing of the United Nations Security Council, Secretary-General António Guterres stated "Generative AI has enormous potential for good and evil at scale", that AI may "turbocharge global development" and contribute between $10 and $15 trillion to the global economy by 2030, but that its malicious use "could cause horrific levels of death and destruction, widespread trauma, and deep psychological damage on an unimaginable scale". In addition, generative AI has a significant carbon footprint.
Based on a nationally representative sample of 20,847 US adults, a 2026 survey study in JAMA Network Open found that daily generative AI use was significantly associated with greater depressive symptoms, with the odds of at least moderate depression roughly 30% higher among daily users than among non-users. The association was strongest for personal use and among those aged 25 to 64; the cross-sectional design did not allow for causal conclusions. Separately, a 2025 nationally representative survey of US adolescents and young adults (aged 12 to 21) found that roughly 13% had used generative AI for emotional support, with more than 90% of them reporting the advice as helpful.
Controlled trials have shown some therapeutic potential. The first randomized controlled trial of a fully generative AI therapy chatbot, published in NEJM AI in 2025, found significant reductions in symptoms of depression, anxiety, and eating disorders over four weeks compared to a waitlist control, with participants rating the therapeutic alliance as comparable to that of human therapists. These findings are consistent with a 2025 meta-analysis of 31 RCTs (n=29,637) that found small-to-moderate effects of AI chatbots in reducing depressive, anxiety, and stress symptoms among young adults. Commercially available therapy chatbots nevertheless show significant shortcomings: a 2025 Stanford University study found that they exhibited stigmatizing attitudes toward conditions such as schizophrenia and alcohol dependence, and responded inappropriately to suicidal ideation and delusional thinking.
Researchers have also raised concerns about AI companion chatbots and emotional dependency. While some users of companion apps report reduced loneliness, scientists worry about long-term dependency when chatbots provide constant validation without challenging users' assumptions. In 2026, Stanford researchers found that users of the Character.AI platform with limited offline social networks reported feeling more lonely after seeking emotional support from chatbots.
Overreliance on generative AI may also affect cognitive skills. In a study presented at the 2026 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, participants who used AI regularly over four weeks showed a decreased ability to discern misinformation on their own.
Generative AI can be used to generate and modify academic prose, paraphrase sources, and translate languages. The use of generative AI in a classroom setting has challenged traditional definitions of academic plagiarism, leading to a "cat-and-mouse" dynamic between students using AI and institutions attempting to detect it. In the immediate wake of ChatGPT's release, many school districts and universities issued temporary bans on the technology, though many institutions have since moved toward policies of managed integration. However, the implementation of these policies often lacks clarity. Research suggests that the burden of interpreting "acceptable use" frequently falls on individual students and teachers, creating an environment where academic honesty becomes difficult to define and enforce.
A commonly proposed use for teachers is grading and giving feedback. Companies like Pearson and ETS use AI to score grammar, mechanics, usage, and style, but not for main ideas or overall structure. The National Council of Teachers of English stated that machine scoring makes students feel their writing is not worth reading.[non-primary source needed] AI scoring has also given unfair results for students from different ethnic backgrounds.
From the early days of the development of AI, there have been arguments put forward by ELIZA creator Joseph Weizenbaum and others about whether tasks that can be done by computers actually should be done by them, given the difference between computers and humans, and between quantitative calculations and qualitative, value-based judgements. In April 2023, it was reported that image generation AI has resulted in 70% of the jobs for video game illustrators in China being lost. In July 2023, developments in generative AI contributed to the 2023 Hollywood labor disputes. Fran Drescher, president of the Screen Actors Guild, declared that "artificial intelligence poses an existential threat to creative professions" during the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike. Voice generation AI has been seen as a potential challenge to the voice acting sector.
However, a 2025 study concluded that the US labor market had so far not experienced a discernible disruption from generative AI. Another study reported that Danish workers who used chatbots saved 2.8% of their time on average, and found no significant change in earnings or hours worked.
In January 2023, Futurism broke the story that CNET had been using an undisclosed internal AI tool to write at least 77 of its stories; after the news broke, CNET posted corrections to 41 of the stories. In April 2023, Die Aktuelle published an AI-generated fake interview of Michael Schumacher. In May 2024, Futurism noted that a content management system video by AdVon Commerce, which had used generative AI to produce articles for many of the aforementioned outlets, appeared to show that they "had produced tens of thousands of articles for more than 150 publishers". In 2025, a report from the American Sunlight Project stated that Pravda network was publishing as many as 10,000 articles a day, and concluded that much of this content aimed to push Russian narratives into large language models through their training data.
In June 2024, Reuters Institute published its Digital News Report for 2024. In a survey of people in America and Europe, Reuters Institute reports that 52% and 47% respectively are uncomfortable with news produced by "mostly AI with some human oversight", and 23% and 15% respectively report being comfortable. 42% of Americans and 33% of Europeans reported that they were comfortable with news produced by "mainly human with some help from AI". The results of global surveys reported that people were more uncomfortable with news topics including politics (46%), crime (43%), and local news (37%) produced by AI than other news topics. A 2025 Pew Research Survey found roughly half of all U.S. adults say that AI will have a very (24%) or somewhat (26%) negative impact on the news people get in the U.S. over the next 20 years.
A language model may associate certain professions with specific genders if such patterns are prevalent in the data. Similarly, some image generation systems have been observed to generate images of men as CEOs more often than women.
AI software, when using voice recognition software in particular, struggles to recognize and understand speech impediments. For example, people with a stutter struggle to activate voice-activated assistants such as Gemini and Siri due to how the software was trained.
Companies that use AI systems to hire for new positions also filter out people with accents and speech due to voice recognition software incorrectly transcribing how candidates speak during the interview process. Because of this, people with disabilities and uncommon accents don't often make it to a human interviewer when these generative AI systems are used. This is due to many AI models being trained and produced in the United States, and therefore, off of American accents.
Deepfakes (a portmanteau of "deep learning" and "fake") are AI-generated media that take a person in an existing image or video and replace them with someone else's likeness using artificial neural networks. Deepfakes have garnered widespread attention and concerns for their uses in deepfake celebrity pornographic videos, revenge porn, fake news, hoaxes, health disinformation, financial fraud, and covert foreign election interference.
In July 2023, the fact-checking company Logically found that the popular generative AI models Midjourney, DALL-E 2 and Stable Diffusion would produce plausible disinformation images when prompted to do so, such as images of electoral fraud in the United States and Muslim women supporting India's Bharatiya Janata Party.
Instances of users abusing software to generate controversial statements in the vocal style of celebrities, public officials, and other famous individuals have raised ethical concerns over voice generation AI. In response, companies such as ElevenLabs have stated that they would work on mitigating potential abuse through safeguards and identity verification.
Concerns and fandoms have spawned from AI-generated music. The same software used to clone voices has been used on famous musicians' voices to create songs that mimic their voices, gaining both tremendous popularity and criticism. Similar techniques have also been used to create improved quality or full-length versions of songs that have been leaked or have yet to be released.
Generative AI has been noted for its use by state-sponsored propaganda campaigns in information laundering. According to a 2025 report by Graphika, generative AI is used to launder articles from Chinese state media such as China Global Television Network through various social media sites in an attempt to disguise the articles' origin.
AI's propensity to produce inaccurate content has led to an estimated global enterprise loss at over $67 million, though other research says the true impact is significant but not yet well-quantified. According to McKinsey’s State of AI 2024 survey, about 44% of organizations have experienced at least one negative consequence from GenAI, with inaccuracy and hallucination among the top cited risks.[citation needed]
Numerous studies have found AI consistently creates inaccurate summaries that sound confidently correct.[citation needed]
The New York Times defines slop as analogous to spam: "shoddy or unwanted A.I. content in social media, art, books, and ... in search results." Journalists have expressed concerns about the scale of low-quality generated content with respect to social media content moderation, the monetary incentives from social media companies to spread such content, false political messaging, spamming of scientific research paper submissions, increased time and effort to find higher quality or desired content on the Internet, the indexing of generated content by search engines, and on journalism itself. Studies have found that AI can create inaccurate claims, citations or summaries that sound confidently correct, a phenomenon called hallucination.
A paper published by researchers at Amazon Web Services AI Labs found that over 57% of sentences from a sample of over 6 billion sentences from Common Crawl, a snapshot of web pages, were machine translated. Many of these automated translations were seen as lower quality, especially for sentences that were translated into at least three languages. Many lower-resource languages (ex. Wolof, Xhosa) were translated across more languages than higher-resource languages (ex. English, French).
In September 2024, Robyn Speer, the author of wordfreq, an open source database that calculated word frequencies based on text from the Internet, announced that she had stopped updating the data for several reasons: high costs for obtaining data from Reddit and Twitter, excessive focus on generative AI compared to other methods in the natural language processing community, and that "generative AI has polluted the data".
The adoption of generative AI tools led to an explosion of AI-generated content across multiple domains. A study from University College London estimated that in 2023, more than 60,000 scholarly articles—over 1% of all publications—were likely written with LLM assistance.[unreliable source?] According to Stanford University's Institute for Human-Centered AI, approximately 17.5% of newly published computer science papers and 16.9% of peer review text now incorporate content generated by LLMs.
If AI-generated content is included in new data crawls from the Internet for additional training of AI models, defects in the resulting models may occur. Training an AI model exclusively on the output of another AI model produces a lower-quality model. Repeating this process, where each new model is trained on the previous model's output, leads to progressive degradation and eventually results in a "model collapse" after multiple iterations.
On the other side, synthetic data can be deployed to train machine learning models while preserving user privacy. The approach is not limited to text generation; image generation has been employed to train computer vision models.
Many websites that allow explicit AI generated images or videos have been created, and this has been used to create illegal content, such as rape, child sexual abuse material, necrophilia, and zoophilia.
Generative AI's ability to create realistic fake content has been exploited in numerous types of cybercrime, including phishing scams. Deepfake video and audio have been used to create disinformation and fraud. In 2020, former Google click fraud czar Shuman Ghosemajumder argued that once deepfake videos become perfectly realistic, they would stop appearing remarkable to viewers, potentially leading to uncritical acceptance of false information. Additionally, large language models and other forms of text-generation AI have been used to create fake reviews of e-commerce websites to boost ratings. Cybercriminals have created large language models focused on fraud, including WormGPT and FraudGPT.
A 2023 study showed that generative AI can be vulnerable to jailbreaks, reverse psychology and prompt injection attacks, enabling attackers to obtain help with harmful requests, such as for crafting social engineering and phishing attacks. Additionally, other researchers have demonstrated that open-source models can be fine-tuned to remove their safety restrictions at low cost.
In 2025, Israel signed a $6 million contract with the US-based firm Clock Tower X that aimed to influence ChatGPT, Gemini and Grok by spreading pro-Israel information onto social media and websites. This was in an attempt to take advantage of the retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) technique which is used by LLMs to provide more up-to-date information.
The CLOUD Act allows United States authorities to request data from covered service providers, including some AI service providers, regardless of where the data is physically stored. Courts can require parent companies to provide data held by their subsidiaries, and such orders may be accompanied by nondisclosure requirements preventing the provider from notifying affected users. This framework has been described in legal commentary as creating legal tension with Article 48 of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), which restricts the transfer of personal data in response to foreign court or administrative orders unless based on an international agreement. As a result, service providers operating in both jurisdictions may face competing legal obligations under U.S. and EU law.
AI has a significant carbon footprint due to growing energy consumption from both training and usage. Scientists and journalists have expressed concerns about the environmental impact that the development and deployment of generative models are having: high CO2 emissions, large amounts of freshwater used for data centers, high amounts of electricity usage, electronic waste, and pollution due to backup diesel generator exhaust. There is also concern that these impacts may increase as these models are incorporated into widely used search engines such as Google Search and Bing, as chatbots and other applications become more popular, and as models need to be retrained.
The carbon footprint of generative AI globally is estimated to be growing steadily, with potential annual emissions ranging from 18.21 to 245.94 million tons of CO2 by 2035, with the highest estimates for 2035 nearing the impact of the United States beef industry on emissions (currently estimated to emit 257.5 million tons annually as of 2024).
Proposed mitigation strategies include factoring potential environmental costs prior to model development or data collection, increasing efficiency of data centers to reduce electricity/energy usage, building more efficient machine learning models, minimizing the number of times that models need to be retrained, developing a government-directed framework for auditing the environmental impact of these models, regulating for transparency of these models, regulating their energy and water usage, encouraging researchers to publish data on their models' carbon footprint, and increasing the number of subject matter experts who understand both machine learning and climate science.
Training frontier AI models requires an enormous amount of computing power. Usually only Big Tech companies have the financial resources to make such investments. Smaller start-ups such as Cohere and OpenAI end up buying access to data centers from Google and Microsoft respectively.
Tools such as GPTZero can detect content generated by AI.  However, they can also make false accusations (false positives).
Digital watermarking is a technique that improves detection accuracy.  It works by altering the generated content at the source, in subtle ways which can be detected by corresponding software.
In 2023, OpenAI developed a watermarking tool for ChatGPT. However, it was not released, because they worried that users would switch to competitors.  They also argued that it would be easy to circumvent, for example by asking another AI to rephrase.
In March 2025, China issued requirements for online service providers to label AI content.
In May 2025, Google deployed its watermarking tool, SynthID.  It marks output from Gemini (text), Imagen (images), and Veo (video).  To detect output from these products, one uses Google's "SynthID detector" portal.
In 2025, users mistakenly accused gaming companies of using generative AI for the video games Little Droid and Chessplus.
This is a timeline of artificial intelligence, also known as synthetic intelligence.
Later, on 9 October 2024, co-founder and CEO of Google DeepMind and Isomorphic Labs Sir Demis Hassabis, and Google DeepMind Director Dr. John Jumper were co-awarded the 2024 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for their work developing AlphaFold.
Artificial intelligence in education (often abbreviated as AIEd) is a subfield of educational technology that studies how to use artificial intelligence (AI) to create learning environments.
Considerations in the field include data-driven decision-making, AI ethics, data privacy, and AI literacy. Concerns include the potential for cheating, over-reliance, equity of access, reduced critical thinking, and the perpetuation of misinformation and bias.
Efforts to integrate AI into educational contexts have often followed technological advancement in the history of artificial intelligence.
In the 1960s, educators and researchers began developing computer-based instruction systems, such as PLATO, developed by the University of Illinois.
In the 1970s, AI techniques were added to computer-assisted instruction (CAI) to form intelligent tutoring systems. The LISP Tutor was evaluated in a Carnegie Mellon University mini-course in the fall of 1984.
The International Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED) Society was founded in 1993, and comprised researchers with backgrounds in computer science, education, and psychology. The International AIED Society also produces the International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (IJAIED).
Coinciding with the AI boom of the 2020s, the use of large language models (LLMs) in the global north has been promoted and funded by venture capital and big tech.[citation needed] Companies creating AI services have targeted students and educational institutions as customers. Similarly, pre-AI boom educational companies have expanded their use of AI technologies. These commercial incentives for AIEd use may be related to a potential AI bubble. In the U.S., bipartisan support of AI development in K-12 education has been expressed, but specific implementations and best practices remain contentious.
Chatbots include OpenAI's ChapGPT, Anthropic's Claude, and Google's Gemini.
ChatGPT was released by OpenAI in November 2022, and its adoption in education was rapid. However, the tool was banned by several institutions. Students have generally reported positive perceptions, but specific views from educators and students vary widely. Opinions are especially varied on what constitutes appropriate use of ChatGPT in education. Efforts to ban chatbots like ChatGPT in schools focus on preventing cheating, but enforcement is hampered due to AI detection inaccuracies and widespread accessibility of chatbot technology. Educators have also expressed concern that overreliance on the tool may foster superficial learning habits, erode critical thinking, and propagate misinformation. Some educators have proposed ways to integrate generative AI (GenAI) into assessments.
Claude is a series of LLMs developed by Anthropic. Its AI-based chatbot was released in March 2023.
In July 2026, Anthropic launch a version of Claude for teachers. Colleges and universities that offer "Claude for Education" include Columbia University, Stanford University, and others.
Gemini is a GenAI chatbot and virtual assistant that was developed by Google in December 2023.
In August 2024, Google launched Gemini Gems, a customizable version of the tool, for educators. It was added to "Google Workspace for Education" accounts in March 2025.
In August 2026, Google added Gemini to its Classroom app for select schools at the elementary through high school level.
AIEd applies theory from education studies, machine learning, and related fields.
A 2019 review of the previous decade of studies found that most research prioritized technological design over pedagogical integration.
Ouyang and Jiao (2021) propose three paradigms for AI in education, which follow roughly from least to most learner-centered and from requiring least to most technical complexity from the AI systems:
Some scholars place AI in education within a socio-technical framework. This positions AI alongside other emerging educational technologies, such as computing, the internet, and social media.
The framework of Tsao, Heinrichs and Camit (2025) draws on new materialism and posthumanism, specifically Donna Haraway's concept of sympoiesis (making-with). This perspective views learning as an entanglement of human and non-human actors (students, teachers, and AI algorithms), where knowledge is co-composed in contact zones between human context and algorithmic prediction.
AI agents have been trained on biased datasets and thus continue to perpetuate societal biases. Since LLMs were created to produce human-like text, algorithmic bias can be introduced and reproduced. AI's data processing and monitoring reinforce neoliberal approaches to education rather than addressing inequalities.
Uses of generative AI chatbots in education have included assessment and feedback, machine translations, proof-reading exam question generation and copy editing, or as virtual assistants.
Emotional AI in education is the study and development of systems that can detect learners' emotions or provide emotional support in learning.
Broad and unplanned use of AI in education administration may lead to harms such as discrimination through superficial categorization of student records, biases in automated grading toward students whose work fits preplanned algorithmic definitions, and exclusion of students from AI training whose previous experiences have not prepared them with requisite computer literacies. However, more structured uses have successfully incorporated generative AI into inquiry-based workflows in which University students use AI for exploration and critique while independently verifying claims against scholarly sources and incorporating expert feedback.
A global survey from 2024 found that students primarily use generative AI for brainstorming, summarization, and research assistance, finding it effective for simplifying complex information but less reliable for factual accuracy and classroom learning. While students recognized its potential to enhance AI literacy and digital communication, professors highlighted significant limitations in critical thinking, interpersonal communication, and decision-making skills. In a global study, approximately 58% of students reported finding the AI tool useful in their daily lives. According to the survey, ChatGPT was particularly beneficial in blended learning environments where a significant portion of learning is conducted online. The majority of students expressed a preference for in-person assistance over AI, describing ChatGPT as a resource for when in-person support was unavailable.
Proponents of using chatbots in education argue for using it to enhance learning outcomes through personalized approaches.
AI chatbots have been used to attempt to improve literacy skills among adolescents and adults learning English as a second language. Chatbots provide feedback on writing and can help improve grammar and vocabulary. These tools can also support students with disabilities, such as dyslexia, by assisting with spelling and grammar. ChatGPT has the potential to automate routine tasks, enabling students to focus on conceptual work. However, the chatbot perpetuates biases in its training data, and OpenAI uses students' data to train upcoming models.
Technology writer Dan Gillmor used ChatGPT in 2022 on a student assignment, and found its generated text was on par with what a good student would deliver and opined that "academia has some very serious issues to confront".
Geography professor Terence Day assessed in 2023 citations generated by ChatGPT and found them to be fake. Despite this, he writes that "the titles of the fake articles are all directly relevant to the questions and could potentially make excellent papers. The lack of a genuine citation could signal an opportunity for an enterprising author to fill a void." According to Day, it is possible to generate high-quality introductory college courses using ChatGPT; he used it to write materials for "introductory physical geography courses, my second-year course in geographical hydrology, and second-year cartography, geographic information systems, and remote sensing." He concludes that "this approach could have significant relevance for open learning and could potentially affect current textbook publishing models." ChatGPT was also seen as an opportunity for cheap and individualized tutoring, leading to the creation of specialized chatbots like Khanmigo.
Artificial intelligence has been incorporated into digital textbooks and other digital learning platforms to create more interactive and personalized learning environments. Such systems can combine traditional textbook content with AI tutoring, adaptive exercises, interactive diagrams and simulations, immediate feedback, and tools for students to answer questions or otherwise interact with course material.
Examples include CK-12's FlexBooks 2.0, which integrate interactive lessons, simulations, adaptive practice and the Flexi AI tutor, and Pearson eTextbooks, which provide interactive diagrams, quizzes, note-taking and AI-generated explanations, summaries and practice questions. In 2025, Google Research introduced Learn Your Way, an experimental system that uses generative artificial intelligence to transform textbook material into personalized explanations and alternative representations while retaining the source material.
Following the release of ChatGPT in November 2022, some schools and large school districts blocked access to the site and issued warnings that the use of such tools would be seen as cheating.
Governmental and non-governmental organizations such as UNESCO, Article 4 of the European Union's AI Act, and the U.S. Department of Education have published reports advocating for specific AIEd approaches. National higher-education bodies have also published guidance on generative AI, including Ireland's Higher Education Authority, which issued a policy framework for higher education teaching and learning in December 2025. In 2024, UNESCO released updated global guidance for generative AI in education, emphasizing ethical use, teacher training, and data protection to ensure responsible integration of AI tools in learning environments. According to Taso (2025), policy implementation in higher education is interpreted and enacted differently by various organizations. These decentralized policies can lead to inconsistent enforcement and confusion among students regarding what constitutes acceptable use, with the burden of ethical navigation falling on individual teachers and students.
AI integration in classrooms has created new forms of invisible labour for educators, who must navigate ambiguous policies, redesign assessments to be AI-resilient, and adjudicate potential academic integrity violations. The use of AI detection tools has also been criticised for creating an adversarial relationship between students and institutions, where students may be falsely accused of misconduct based on probabilistic software.
AIEd advocates say that efforts should be made toward increasing global accessibility and training educators to serve underprivileged areas.
In 2025, survey responses published by College Board showed that about two in five schools or school districts prohibited students' use of GenAI tools. However, 55% of high school principals reported that neither students nor educators had been blocked from accessing these tools on school networks.
According to NPR in a poll conducted with Ipsos in 2026, of 545 K-12 educators in the US, "nearly 3-in-4 believe AI has bigger implications for education than past innovations like the internet or computers." Around half of educators said they had used AI for work tasks. More than half said that students did not use AI in the classroom at all. Around half said it interfered with students ability to learn critical thinking skills, and that it was a shortcut for students to avoid work. Almost 80% of respondents said that schools should include teaching responsible AI usage as part of their curricula.
Andrew Maynard of Arizona State University, and Jules White of Vanderbilt University, both futures studies professors, have developed university courses specifically for prompt engineering generative AI chatbots. Although many schools have banned the use of ChatGPT, some professors have instead incorporated ChatGPT into assignments, saying that it is not feasible or practical to ban students from using it. One said that ChatGPT improved his students' work by assisting in the generation of ideas.
Reliance on generative AI has been linked with reduced academic self-esteem and performance, and heightened learned helplessness. Algorithm errors and hallucinations are common flaws in AI agents, making them less trustworthy and reliable.
According to a 2025 survey from Inside Higher Ed, 85% of higher education students use generative AI technology in some way, with 25% using AI to complete assignments for them. The most common reason cited for using AI to cheat was pressure to get high grades. 97% of students wanted some form of action from schools on the threat to academic integrity caused by AI, with the most popular options being clearer policies and more education about ethical uses of AI.
Survey responses published by College Board showed that the number of high school students using GenAI tools for schoolwork had increased from 79% in January 2025 to 84% in May 2025.
In September 2025, The Atlantic published an op-ed from a high school senior arguing that the normalization of AI cheating was eroding critical thinking, academic integrity, creativity, and the shared student experience.
According to a 2026 study by Lumina Foundation-Gallup, 57% of U.S. college students reported using AI for coursework on a weekly basis, with about one in five using it on a daily basis.
Daniel Herman's perspective reflects concerns about the potential devaluation of writing skills if AI can generate text as easily as humans. Similarly, Naomi S. Baron wrote "If AI text generation does our writing for us, we diminish opportunities to think out problems for ourselves". She also mentioned the risk of a slippery slope, where students start letting generative AI control the content and style of their writing, leading to a diminished sense of ownership. Others highlight the need for educators to adapt their methods to focus more on critical thinking and reasoning, as AI tools like ChatGPT could potentially be used for plagiarism or produce biased content.
ChatGPT, like other LLM-based chatbots, can produce plausible-sounding falsehoods, a concept sometimes referred to as hallucination.
Students' over-reliance on ChatGPT may impact their cognitive offloading and memory retention.
A 2026 University of Edinburgh study analyzing 26 education subreddits found that disputes over AI-assisted cheating and detection dominate GenAI-related discussions, drawing long, heated debates between students and teachers, creating friction between the two groups.
ChatGPT's capability to generate assignments has prompted concerns about academic integrity, particularly in essay writing, with critics foreseeing potential misuse and devaluation of traditional writing skills. A survey conducted between March and April 2023 revealed 58% of American students acknowledged using ChatGPT, with 38% admitting use without teacher consent, highlighting challenges in enforcing bans. Students have shown strongly differing opinions on the extent to which the use of ChatGPT should be viewed as misconduct. Kevin Roose stated that ChatGPT's prohibition was impractical to enforce. Students can access the internet outside of schools, effectively rendering a ban obsolete; he further suggested that teachers allow it openly for some assignments similar to calculators, and that teaching with the AI is the best approach.
A professor at Texas A&M University misused ChatGPT to check student assignments for verifying whether an assignment utilized the large language model. ChatGPT claimed all the students used it, and so the professor gave a failing grade to all of his students. In fact, ChatGPT is unable to reliably verify whether it was used to write a piece of text. A post to a Reddit community dedicated to ChatGPT received widespread attention with many attacking the professor for a lack of familiarity towards the chatbot.
Universities have stated serious concerns with the integrity of their curriculum due to students using ChatGPT and other AI tools. Baylor University asked students to submit handwritten essays in order to uphold academic integrity. The oral exam has also been used as an example of an instruction method which could circumvent the assignment and test students' knowledge more effectively on a 1:1 basis.
OpenAI launched "ChatGPT Edu" in May 2024.
The education technology company Chegg, which was a website dedicated to helping students with assignments using a database of collected worksheets and assignments, became one of the most prominent business victims to ChatGPT, with its stock price nearly being cut in half after a quarterly earnings call in May 2023.
Some educational institutions have chosen to ban access to generate AI. The reasons behind these decisions likely vary, but concerns about potential misuse, such as plagiarism or reliance on AI for writing tasks, could be driving factors. ChatGPT has been met with various bans from certain educational institutions. One of the earliest districts to ban the tool was the Los Angeles Unified School District, which blocked access to the tool less than a month after its official release. The New York City Department of Education blocked access to ChatGPT announced a ban around January 4, 2023.
In February 2023, the University of Hong Kong sent a campus-wide email to instructors and students stating that the use of ChatGPT or other AI tools is prohibited in all classes, assignments and assessments at the university. Any violations would be treated as plagiarism by the university unless the student obtains the prior written consent from the course instructor.
Some schools in the United States for the 2023–24 school year announced a repeal of their bans for ChatGPT. In May 2023, New York City repealed its ban on ChatGPT. Davis Banks, the head of New York City's public schools at the time, explained that the initial decision to ban the tool was driven by a "knee-jerk fear [that] overlooked the potential of generative AI to support students and teachers". He also recognized that AI would inevitably be a part of students' future workplaces and argued that teaching them to use it ethically would be more beneficial than imposing a blanket ban. With the ban lifted, educators in New York City now have the opportunity to use ChatGPT for various educational purposes, including teaching about AI prejudice and creating lessons. To assist in this transition, the city's Department of Education committed to providing educators with "resources, real-life examples of successful AI implementation in schools, and an AI toolkit".
Another district, Walla Walla Public Schools, located in rural Washington, also lifted its ban on ChatGPT starting in the 2023–24 school year. To support this transition, the district hosted a daylong workshop that focused on the positive learning benefits of AI in the classroom. The event was attended by around 100 local educators.
Some companies provide software which purports to detect the use of AI in essays. Among the first companies to develop such a service was Turnitin. A corporate blog post from the company stated that the company's database of numerous student essays was used to train its own detection system. When tested by The Washington Post, it was noted that Turnitin's detector flagged an innocent student for using ChatGPT to generate the conclusion of her essay. There have been numerous other cases similar to this in which a student is falsely accused of using AI and report not knowing how to prove their innocence.
Other similar detection tools include GPTZero. Detection software often fails to detect content generated by AI, and such tools are easy to fool. Tools such as AI humanizers, which aim to make AI-generated text appear more human-like, help to trick AI detectors. OpenAI's official AI detection tool, Classifier, launched in January 2023, and was later taken down in August 2023 due to low usage and accuracy issues.
To combat false accusations of academic dishonesty, AI detection creators and educators recommend not relying solely on these tools.
Artificial intelligence (AI) and its subfields have been used in applications throughout industry and academia. Machine learning has been used for various scientific and commercial purposes, including language translation, image recognition, decision-making, credit scoring, and e-commerce. Since the 2020s, massive advancements have been made in the field of generative AI (GenAI) as a result of the 2017 inception of Transformer Model architecture. GenAI has the ability to create text, images, voice, music, videos, and other forms of data from chat-based prompting.
In agriculture, AI has been proposed as a way for farmers to identify areas that need irrigation, fertilization, or pesticide treatments to increase yields, thereby improving efficiency. AI has been used to attempt to classify livestock pig call emotions, automate greenhouses, detect diseases and pests, and optimize irrigation.
AI in architecture is the use of AI in automation, design, and planning in the architectural process or in assisting human skills in the field of architecture.
AI has been used by some architects for design, and has been proposed as a way to automate planning and routine tasks in the field.
A 2019 study found that generative AI increased productivity by 15% in contact centers. Another 2019 study found it increased productivity by up to 40% for writing tasks. An August 2025 review by MIT found that of surveyed companies, 95% did not report any improvement in revenue from the use of AI. In September 2025, a Harvard Business Review article described how increased use of AI does not automatically lead to increases in revenue or actual productivity. Referring to "AI generated work content that masquerades as good work, but lacks the substance to meaningfully advance a given task", the article coined the term workslop. Per studies done in collaboration with the Stanford Social Media Lab, workslop does not improve productivity and undermines trust and collaboration among colleagues.
In telehealth, agentic AI is reportedly facilitating the creation of large business models (millions in annual profit) with 1–2 employees, such as MEDVi, which as of August 2025 only had 2 employees and ~$75M in annual profit for GLP-1 weight-loss telehealth services.
AI can be used for real-time code completion, chat, and automated test generation. These tools are typically integrated with editors and IDEs as plugins. AI-assisted software development systems differ in functionality, quality, speed, and approach to privacy. Creating software primarily via AI is known as "vibe coding". Code created or suggested by AI can be incorrect or inefficient. The use of AI-assisted coding can potentially speed-up software development, but it can also slow-down the process by creating more work when debugging and testing. The rush to prematurely adopt AI technology can also incur additional technical debt. AI also requires additional consideration and careful review for cybersecurity, since AI coding software is trained on a wide range of code of inconsistent quality and often replicates poor practices.
AI can be used to create other AIs. For example, around November 2017, Google's AutoML project to evolve new neural net topologies created NASNet, a system optimized for ImageNet and POCO F1. NASNet's performance exceeded all previously published performance on ImageNet.
Research and development of quantum computers has been performed with machine learning algorithms. For example, there is a prototype, photonic, quantum memristive device for neuromorphic computers (NC)/artificial neural networks and NC-using quantum materials with some variety of potential neuromorphic computing-related applications. The use of quantum machine learning for quantum simulators has been proposed for solving physics and chemistry problems.[better source needed]
Artificial intelligence and machine learning are used in electronic design automation to assist with integrated circuit design, including floorplanning, placement, routing, functional verification, and optimization of power, performance, and chip area.
AI researchers have created many tools to solve difficult problems in computer science. Many of their inventions have been adopted by mainstream computer science and are no longer considered AI. The following were originally developed in AI laboratories:
AI programs have been used in hiring processes to screen resumes and rank candidates based on their qualifications, predict a candidate's likelihood of success in a given role, and automate repetitive communication tasks using chatbots. Studies on these programs have identified tendencies for gender bias, favoring male names and male-coded characteristics, as well as bias against disabled candidates and racial minorities.
AI underlies avatars (automated online assistants) on web pages. It can reduce operation and training costs. In 2016, Pypestream automated customer service for its mobile application to streamline communication with customers.
A Google app analyzes language and converts speech into text.[non-primary source needed] The platform can identify angry customers through their language and respond appropriately. Amazon uses a chatbot for customer service that can perform tasks like checking the status of an order, cancelling orders, offering refunds, and connecting the customer with a human representative.[non-primary source needed]
In the hospitality industry, AI is used to reduce repetitive tasks, analyze trends, interact with guests, and predict customer needs. AI hotel services come in the form of a chatbot, application, virtual voice assistant, and service robots.
In educational institutions, AI has been used to automate routine tasks such as attendance tracking, grading, and marking. AI tools have also been used to monitor student progress and analyze learning behaviors, with the goal of facilitating timely interventions for students facing academic challenges.
As of 2025 and 2026, respectively, about 80% of high school students and nearly 60% of college students were also using AI. Some schools and universities proposed restrictions on students' usage due to issues with increased cheating, over-reliance on AI tools, and widening of digital inequities.[unreliable source?]
The U.S. Department of Energy wrote in an April 2024 report that AI may have applications in modeling power grids, reviewing federal permits with large language models (LLMs), predicting levels of renewable energy production, and improving the planning process for electrical vehicle charging networks. Other studies have suggested that machine learning can be used for energy consumption prediction and scheduling (e.g., to help with renewable energy intermittency management).
The late 1980s and early 1990s saw expert systems used in technical and environmental domains. For example, researchers built a fishway design advisor to recommend fish passage structures under varying hydraulic and biological conditions using the VP-Expert shell. Transportation researchers applied the same shell to balance airport capacity with noise-mitigation plans. In agriculture, a potato insect expert system (PIES) supported pest management decisions for Colorado potato beetle. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's CORMIX system for modeling pollutant discharges combined rules with Fortran hydrodynamic models.
Autonomous ships that monitor the ocean, AI-driven satellite data analysis, passive acoustics or remote sensing and other applications of environmental monitoring make use of machine learning. For example, "Global Plastic Watch" is an AI-based satellite-monitoring platform for analysis/tracking of plastic waste sites to help with the prevention of plastic pollution—primarily ocean pollution—by helping identify who mismanages plastic waste and where dumping into oceans occurs.
Machine learning can be used to spot early warning signs of disasters and environmental issues, possibly including natural pandemics, earthquakes, landslides, heavy rainfall, long-term water supply vulnerability, tipping-points of ecosystem collapse, cyanobacterial bloom outbreaks, and droughts.
In 2023, the University of Southern California launched the Center for Artificial Intelligence in Society, with the goal of using AI to address problems such as homelessness. Stanford University researchers use AI to analyze satellite images to identify high poverty areas.
AI applications analyze media content such as movies, TV programs, advertisement videos, and user-generated content. The solutions often involve computer vision.
Typical scenarios include the analysis of images using object recognition or facial recognition techniques, or the analysis of video for recognizing scenes, objects, or faces. AI-based media analysis can facilitate media search, the creation of descriptive keywords for content, content policy monitoring (such as verifying the suitability of content for a particular TV viewing time), speech to text for archival or other purposes, and the detection of logos, products, or celebrity faces for ad placement.
Deep-fakes can be used for comedic purposes but are better known for fake news and hoaxes. Deepfakes can portray individuals in harmful or compromising situations, causing significant reputational damage and emotional distress—especially when the content is defamatory or violates personal ethics. While defamation and false light laws offer some recourse, their focus on false statements rather than fabricated images or videos often leaves victims with limited legal protection and a challenging burden of proof. Audio deepfakes and AI software capable of detecting deep-fakes and cloning human voices have also been developed.
In January 2016, the Horizon 2020 program financed the InVID Project to help journalists and researchers detect fake documents, made available as browser plugins.
In September 2018, U.S. Senator Mark Warner proposed penalizing social media companies that allow sharing of deep-fake documents on their platforms. In 2018, Darius Afchar and Vincent Nozick found a way to detect faked content by analyzing the mesoscopic properties of video frames. DARPA gave $68M to work on deep-fake detection.
AI for video surveillance utilizes computer software programs that analyze audio and images from video surveillance cameras to recognize humans, vehicles, objects, and events. Security contractors program the software to define restricted areas within the camera's view (such as a fenced-off area, a parking lot but not sidewalk, or a public street outside the lot) and program for times of day (such as after the close of a business) for the property being protected by the camera surveillance. The AI sends an alert if it detects a trespasser breaking the "rule" set that no person is allowed in that area during that time of day.
AI algorithms have been used to detect deepfake videos.
AI is also starting to be used in video production, with tools and software being developed that utilize generative AI to create new video, or alter existing video. Examples of these tools include DALL-E, Midjourney, and Runway. In 2023, Waymark Studios utilized the tools offered by both DALL-E and Midjourney to create a fully AI generated film called The Frost. Waymark is experimenting with using AI tools to generate advertisements and commercials for companies in seconds. Yves Bergquist, a director of the AI & Neuroscience in Media Project at USC's Entertainment Technology Center, says post production crews in Hollywood are already using generative AI, and predicts that in the future more companies will embrace this new technology.
AI has been used to compose music of various genres.
David Cope created an AI called Emily Howell that became well known in the field of algorithmic computer music. The algorithm behind Emily Howell is registered as a US patent.
In 2012, AI Iamus created the first complete classical album.
AIVA (Artificial Intelligence Virtual Artist), composes symphonic music, mainly classical music for film scores. It became the first virtual composer to be recognized by a musical professional association.
Melomics creates computer-generated music for stress and pain relief.
The Watson Beat uses reinforcement learning and deep belief networks to compose music on a simple seed input melody and a select style. The software was open sourced, and musicians such as Taryn Southern collaborated with the project.
South Korean singer Hayeon's debut song, "Eyes on You", was composed using AI which was supervised by real composers, including NUVO.
Narrative Science sells computer-generated news and reports. It summarizes sporting events based on statistical data from a game. It also creates financial reports and real estate analyses. Automated Insights generates personalized recaps and previews for Yahoo Sports Fantasy Football.
Yseop uses AI to turn structured data into natural language comments and recommendations. It writes financial reports, executive summaries, and personalized sales or marketing documents in multiple languages, including English, Spanish, French, and German.
TALESPIN made up stories similar to the fables of Aesop. The program started with a set of characters who wanted to achieve certain goals. Mark Riedl and Vadim Bulitko asserted that the essence of storytelling was experience management, or "how to balance the need for a coherent story progression with user agency, which is often at odds".
While AI storytelling focuses on story generation (character and plot), story communication also received attention. In 2002, researchers developed an architectural framework for narrative prose generation. They faithfully reproduced text variety and complexity on stories such as Little Red Riding Hood. In 2016, a Japanese AI co-wrote a short story and almost won a literary prize.
South Korean company Hanteo Global uses a journalism bot to write articles.
Literary authors are also exploring uses of AI. An example is David Jhave Johnston's work ReRites (2017–2019), where the poet created a daily rite of editing the poetic output of a neural network to create a series of performances and publications.
In 2010, AI used baseball statistics to automatically generate news articles. This was launched by The Big Ten Network using software from Narrative Science.
After being unable to cover every Minor League Baseball game with a large team, Associated Press collaborated with Automated Insights in 2016 to create game recaps that were automated by AI.
UOL in Brazil expanded the use of AI in its writing. In addition to generating news stories, they programmed the AI to include commonly searched words on Google.
El Pais, a Spanish news site, allows users to make comments on news articles. They use the Perspective API to moderate these comments and if the software deems a comment to contain toxic language, the commenter must modify it to publish it.
A local Dutch media group used AI to create automatic coverage of amateur soccer, set to cover 60,000 games in a single season. NDC partnered with United Robots to create the algorithm.
In 2023, Lede AI was used to take scores from high school football games and generate stories for the local newspaper. It was met with criticism from readers, who mocked the robotic diction and called out the publishing company, Gannett, on social media. Gannett has since halted their used of Lede AI.
Some editors of Wikimedia projects use AI and machine learning programs to edit existing articles or create new ones.
Some applications of AI, like using large language models (LLMs) to create new articles from scratch, have been more controversial than others for the Wikipedia community. In August 2025, English Wikipedia adopted a policy that allowed editors to nominate suspected LLM-generated articles for speedy deletion. Then, a March 2026 decision prohibited the use of LLMs to generate or rewrite article content, with exceptions for copyediting one's own writing and machine translation from another language's Wikipedia.
Wikipedia has also been a significant source of training data for some of the earliest AI projects. This has received mixed reactions, including concern about companies not citing Wikipedia when relying on it to answer a question as well as Wikipedia's increased costs from data scraping.
Millions of its articles have been edited by bots, which however are usually not AI software. Many AI platforms use Wikipedia data, mainly for training machine learning applications. There is research and development of various AI applications for Wikipedia, such as for identifying outdated sentences, detecting covert vandalism or recommending articles and tasks to new editors.
Machine translation (see above) has also be used for translating Wikipedia articles and could play a larger role in creating, updating, expanding, and generally improving articles in the future. A content translation tool allows editors of some Wikipedias to more easily translate articles across several select languages.
In video games, AI is routinely used to generate behavior in non-player characters (NPCs). In addition, AI is used for pathfinding. Games with less typical AI include the AI director of Left 4 Dead (2008) and the neuroevolutionary training of platoons in Supreme Commander 2 (2010).
In the 21st century, AIs have beaten human players in many games, including chess (Deep Blue), Jeopardy! (Watson), Go (AlphaGo), poker (Pluribus and Cepheus), E-sports (StarCraft), and general game playing (AlphaZero and MuZero).
Kuki AI is a set of chatbots and other apps which were designed for entertainment and as a marketing tool.
The first AI art program, AARON, was developed by Harold Cohen in 1968 with the goal of being able to code the act of drawing. It started by creating simple black and white drawings, and later to painting using special brushes and dyes chosen by the program without mediation from Cohen.
AI platforms such as DALL-E, Stable Diffusion, Imagen, and Midjourney have been used for generating visual images from inputs such as text or other images. Some AI tools allow users to input images and output changed versions, such as to display an object or product in different environments. AI image models can also attempt to replicate the specific styles of artists, and can add visual complexity to rough sketches.
AI has been used to generate quantitative analysis of existing digital art collections. Two computational methods, close reading and distant viewing, are typical approaches used to analyze digitized art. While distant viewing includes the analysis of large collections, close reading involves one piece of artwork.
In 2023, Netflix of Japan's usage of AI to generate background images for the short The Dog & the Boy was met with backlash online.
Banks use AI to organize operations for bookkeeping, investing in stocks, and managing properties. AI can adapt to changes during non-business hours.
In the 1980s, AI started to become prominent in finance as expert systems were commercialized. For example, Dupont created 100 expert systems, which helped them save almost $10M per year. One of the first systems was the Pro-trader expert system that predicted the 87-point drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average in 1986.
An early expert system to help with financial plans was PlanPowerm and Client Profiling System, launched by Applied Expert Systems (APEX) in 1986. It helped create personal financial plans for people.
In 1987 Security Pacific National Bank's fraud prevention task-force began using an expert system to counter the unauthorized use of debit cards.
The use of AI in applications such as online trading and decision-making has changed major economic theories. For example, AI-based buying and selling platforms estimate personalized demand and supply curves, thus enabling individualized pricing. AI systems reduce information asymmetry in the market and thus make markets more efficient. The application of AI in the financial industry can help alleviate financing constraints of non-state-owned enterprises, especially for smaller and more innovative enterprises.
Large financial institutions use AI to assist with their investment practices. BlackRock's AI engine, Aladdin, is used both within the company and by clients to help with investment decisions. Its functions include the use of natural language processing to analyze text such as news, broker reports, and social media feeds. It then gauges the sentiment on the companies mentioned and assigns a score. Banks such as UBS and Deutsche Bank use SQREEM (Sequential Quantum Reduction and Extraction Model) to mine data to develop consumer profiles and match them with wealth management products.
Online lender Upstart uses machine learning for underwriting. ZestFinance's Zest Automated Machine Learning (ZAML) platform is used for credit underwriting. It uses machine learning to analyze data, including purchase transactions and how a customer fills out a form, to score borrowers. It can also assign credit scores to those with limited credit histories.
AI makes continuous auditing possible. Potential benefits include reducing audit risk, increasing the level of assurance, and reducing audit duration.[quantify] Continuous auditing with AI allows real-time monitoring and reporting of financial activities and provides businesses with timely insights that can lead to quick decision-making.
In 1993, FinCEN Artificial Intelligence System (FAIS) was launched. It was able to review over 200,000 transactions per week, and over two years, it helped identify 400 potential cases of money laundering equal to $1 billion. These expert systems were later replaced by machine learning systems.
AI software, such as LaundroGraph which uses contemporary suboptimal datasets, could be used for anti–money laundering (AML).
In the European Union, the Artificial Intelligence Act (Regulation (EU) 2024/1689) classifies several finance‑sector uses of AI as "high‑risk", including systems used to evaluate the creditworthiness of natural persons or to establish a credit score and AI used for risk assessment and pricing in life or health insurance. These systems must meet requirements on risk management, data governance, technical documentation and logging, transparency, and human oversight. The Act's obligations are phased in: prohibitions and AI‑literacy rules apply from 2 February 2025, governance and most GPAI duties from 2 August 2025, the bulk of obligations from 2 August 2026, and certain safety‑component high‑risk obligations from 2 August 2027.
AI in healthcare is often used for classification, such as to evaluate a CT scan or electrocardiogram or to identify high-risk patients for population health. Additional potential applications like robot-assisted surgery, virtual nursing assistants, and dosage error reductions could create billions in annual savings for U.S. health care.
For certain disorders and diseases, AI algorithms can aid in diagnosis, recommended treatments, outcome prediction, and patient progress tracking. Early detection of diseases like cancer is made possible by AI algorithms, which diagnose diseases by analyzing complex sets of medical data. For example, Microsoft's AI project Hanover helps doctors choose cancer treatments from among the more than 800 medicines and vaccines. Studies have shown AI capable of identifying skin cancers and diagnosing eye conditions, similar to an ophthalmologist, and recommending treatment referrals via transfer learning. Another project monitors multiple high-risk patients by asking each patient questions based on data acquired from doctor/patient interactions.
Artificial neural networks are used as clinical decision support systems for medical diagnosis, such as in concept processing technology in electronic medical record (EMR) software.
Other healthcare tasks thought suitable for an AI that are in development include:
AI-enabled chatbots decrease the need for humans to perform basic call center tasks, and machine learning in sentiment analysis can spot fatigue to prevent overwork.
Decision support systems can potentially prevent industrial disasters and make disaster response more efficient. For manual workers in material handling, predictive analytics has been proposed to reduce musculoskeletal injury.
AI can attempt to process workers' compensation claims. AI has been proposed for detection of accident near misses, which are underreported.
Machine learning has been used for drug design, drug discovery and development, drug repurposing, improving pharmaceutical productivity, and clinical trials.
Computer-planned syntheses via computational reaction networks, described as a platform that combines "computational synthesis with AI algorithms to predict molecular properties", has been used in drug-syntheses, and developing routes for recycling 200 industrial waste chemicals into important drugs and agrochemicals (chemical synthesis design). It has also been used to explore the origins of life on Earth.
Deep learning has been used with databases for the development of a 46-day process to design, synthesize and test a drug which inhibits enzymes of a particular gene, DDR1. DDR1 is involved in cancers and fibrosis which is one reason for the high-quality datasets that enabled these results.
The AI program AlphaFold 2 can determine the 3D structure of a (folded) protein in hours rather than the months required by earlier automated approaches and was used to provide the likely structures of all proteins in the human body and essentially all proteins known to science (more than 200M).[excessive citations]
Speech translation technology attempts to convert one language into another. This could potentially reduce language barriers in global commerce and cross-cultural exchange, enabling speakers of various languages to communicate. AI has been used to automatically translate spoken language and textual content in products like Microsoft Translator, Google Translate, and DeepL Translator. Also, research and development are in progress to decode and conduct animal communication.
Meaning is conveyed not only by text, but also through usage and context (see semantics and pragmatics). As a result, the two primary categorization approaches for machine translations are statistical machine translation (SMT) and neural machine translations (NMTs). The old method of performing translation was to use statistical methodology to forecast the best probable output with specific algorithms. However, with NMT, the approach employs dynamic algorithms to achieve better translations based on context.
AI facial recognition systems are used for mass surveillance, notably in China. In 2019, Bengaluru, India deployed AI-managed traffic signals that uses cameras to monitor traffic density and adjust signal timing based on the interval needed to clear traffic.
AI is a mainstay of law-related professions. Algorithms and machine learning do some tasks previously done by entry-level lawyers. While its use is common, it is not expected to replace most work done by lawyers in the near future.
The electronic discovery industry uses machine learning to reduce manual searching.
Law enforcement has begun using facial recognition systems (FRS) to identify suspects from visual data. FRS results have proven to be more accurate when compared to eyewitness results, as well as better at identifying individuals when video clarity and visibility are low compared to human participants.
COMPAS is a commercial system used by U.S. courts to assess the likelihood of recidivism. One concern relates to algorithmic bias, AI programs may become biased after processing data that exhibits bias. ProPublica claims that the average COMPAS-assigned recidivism risk level of black defendants is significantly higher than that of white defendants.
In 2019, the city of Hangzhou, China established a pilot program AI-based Internet Court to adjudicate disputes related to ecommerce and internet-related intellectual property claims.: 124  Parties appear before the court via videoconference and AI evaluates the evidence presented and applies relevant legal standards.: 124 
AI has been combined with digital spectrometry by IdeaCuria Inc., to enable applications such as at-home water quality monitoring.
In the 1990s, early AI tools controlled toys like Aibo, a domestic robot in the form of a robotic dog with intelligent features and autonomy. In the mid-2010s, Mattel's Hello Barbie could "understand" conversations, give intelligent responses, and remember.
AI in toys could offer personalized learning. However, in May 2026, after early tests to see how toddlers interact with AI, researchers called for tighter regulation on AI-powered toys. Similarly, nonprofit organization Common Sense Media warned against children under five using AI.
Oil and gas companies have used AI tools to automate functions, foresee equipment issues, and increase oil and gas output.
AI tools have been used to translate mathematical proofs into formal proofs to automatically verify them.
Automated theorem proving (also known as ATP or automated deduction) is a subfield of automated reasoning and mathematical logic dealing with proving mathematical theorems by computer programs. Automated reasoning over mathematical proof was a major motivating factor for the development of computer science.
AlphaGeometry is an AI program, developed by Google DeepMind, that can solve hard problems in Euclidean geometry. The system comprises a data-driven LLM and a rule-based symbolic engine (Deductive Database Arithmetic Reasoning). The program solved 25 geometry problems out of 30 from the International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO) under competition time limits—a performance almost as good as the average human gold medallist. For comparison, the previous AI program, called Wu's method, solved only 10 problems.
Traditional geometry programs are symbolic engines that rely exclusively on human-coded rules to generate rigorous proofs, which makes them lack flexibility in unusual situations. AlphaGeometry combines such a symbolic engine with a specialized LLM trained on synthetic data of geometrical proofs. When the symbolic engine doesn't find a formal and rigorous proof on its own, it solicits the LLM, which suggests a geometrical construct to move forward. It is unclear how applicable this method is to other domains of mathematics or reasoning, because symbolic engines rely on domain-specific rules and because of the need for synthetic data.
FunSearch, also developed by DeepMind, combines an LLM with automated evaluation to search for programs that can help solve mathematical problems. It has been applied to extremal combinatorics, including the cap set problem, and to online bin packing.
AI systems have also been used to search for improved algorithms and computational routines. AlphaTensor, AlphaDev, and AlphaEvolve have been applied to matrix multiplication algorithms, sorting routines, and broader scientific and algorithmic discovery.
Various countries are deploying AI military applications. Research is targeting intelligence collection and analysis, logistics, cyber operations, information operations, and semiautonomous and autonomous vehicles.
AI has been used in military operations in Iraq, Syria, Israel, and Ukraine.
AI is used in robotics to help robots perceive their surroundings, plan actions, navigate, manipulate objects, and adapt to changing environments. AI systems are used to connect sensor data with physical action, especially in systems operating outside controlled factory settings.
AI has been used in B2B sourcing and procurement. Academic literature and industry reports point out uses of AI for supplier evaluation and selection, predictive demand forecasting, automated contract and invoice processing, and supply-chain risk assessment. Machine learning, natural language processing, and robotic process automation are commonly used in procurement.
Machine learning has been used for recommendation systems in determining which posts should show up in social media feeds. Various types of social media analysis also make use of machine learning, and there is research into its use for (semi-)automated tagging/enhancement/correction of online misinformation and related filter bubbles.
AI has been used to customize shopping options and personalize offers. Online gambling companies have used AI for targeting gamblers.
Intelligent personal assistants use AI to attempt to respond to natural language requests. Siri, released in 2010 for Apple smartphones, popularized the concept.
Bing Chat has used AI as part of its search engine.
Machine learning can be used to combat spam, scams, and phishing. It can scrutinize the content of spam and phishing attacks to attempt to identify malicious elements. Some models built via machine learning algorithms have over 90% accuracy in distinguishing between spam and legitimate emails. These models can be refined using new data and evolving spam tactics. Machine learning also analyzes traits such as sender behavior, email header information, and attachment types, potentially enhancing spam detection.
AI has been used in facial recognition systems. Some examples are Apple's Face ID and Android's Face Unlock, which are used to secure mobile devices.
China has used facial recognition and AI technology in Xinjiang. In 2017, reporters visiting the region found surveillance cameras installed every hundred meters or so in several cities, as well as facial recognition checkpoints at areas like gas stations, shopping centers, and mosque entrances. Human rights groups have criticized the Chinese government for using AI facial recognition technology for use in political suppression.
The Netherlands has deployed facial recognition and AI technology since 2016. As of 2019, the database of the Dutch police contained over 2.2M pictures of 1.3M Dutch citizens. This accounts for about 8% of the population. In The Netherlands, face recognition is not used by the police on municipal CCTV.
Image labeling has been used by Google Image Labeler to detect products in photos and allow people to search based on a photo. Image labeling has also been demonstrated to generate speech to describe images to blind people.
In April 2024, the Scientific Advice Mechanism to the European Commission published advice including a comprehensive evidence review of the opportunities and challenges posed by AI in scientific research.
As benefits, the evidence review highlighted AI's role in accelerating research and innovation, its capacity to automate workflows, and its ability to enhance dissemination of scientific work. As challenges, the review highlighted limitations and risks (specifically around transparency, reproducibility, and interpretability), poor performance (inaccuracy), risk of harm through misuse or unintended use, as well as societal concerns, including the spread of misinformation and increasing inequalities.
Machine learning can help to restore and attribute ancient texts. It can help to index texts, e.g., to enable better and easier searching and classification of fragments.
AI can also be used to investigate genomes to uncover genetic history, such as interbreeding between archaic and modern humans by which, e.g., the past existence of a ghost population, not Neanderthal or Denisovan, was inferred. 
It can also be used for "non-invasive and non-destructive access to internal structures of archaeological remains". A deep learning system was reported to learn intuitive physics from visual data (of virtual 3D environments) based on an unpublished approach inspired by studies of visual cognition in infants. Other researchers have developed a machine learning algorithm that could discover sets of basic variables of various physical systems and predict the systems' future dynamics from video recordings of their behavior. In the future, it may be possible that such can be used to automate the discovery of physical laws of complex systems.
In November 2023, researchers at Google DeepMind and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory announced that AI system GNoME had documented over 2M new materials. GNoME uses deep learning techniques to examine potential material structures and identify stable inorganic crystal structures. The system's predictions were validated through autonomous robotic experiments, with a success rate of 71%. The data is publicly available through the Materials Project database.
Machine learning is used in diverse types of reverse engineering. For example, machine learning has been used to reverse engineer a composite material part, enabling unauthorized production of high quality parts, and for quickly understanding the behavior of malware. It can be used to reverse engineer AI models. It can also design components by engaging in a type of reverse engineering of not-yet existent virtual components, such as inverse molecular design for particular desired functionality or protein design for pre-specified functional sites. Biological network reverse engineering could model interactions in a human understandable way, e.g., based on time-series data of gene expression levels.
AI is used in astronomy to analyze increasing amounts of available data and applications, mainly for "classification, regression, clustering, forecasting, generation, discovery, and the development of new scientific insights" e.g., for discovering exoplanets, forecasting solar activity, and distinguishing between signals and instrumental effects in gravitational wave astronomy. It could also be used for space exploration, including analysis of data from space missions, real-time science decisions of spacecraft, space debris avoidance, and more autonomous operation.
In the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI), machine learning has been used in attempts to identify artificially generated electromagnetic waves in available data—such as real-time observations—and other technosignatures, e.g. via anomaly detection. In ufology, the SkyCAM-5 project headed by Prof. Hakan Kayal and the Galileo Project headed by Avi Loeb use machine learning to attempt to detect and classify types of UFOs. The Galileo Project also seeks to detect two further types of potential extraterrestrial technological signatures with the use of AI: 'Oumuamua-like interstellar objects, and non-manmade artificial satellites.
Machine learning can also be used to produce datasets of spectral signatures of molecules that may be involved in the atmospheric production or consumption of particular chemicals—such as phosphine possibly detected on Venus—which could prevent miss assignments and, if accuracy is improved, be used in future detection and identification of molecules on other planets.
There is research about which types of computer-aided chemistry would benefit from machine learning. A deep learning AI-based process has been developed that uses genome databases to design novel proteins based on evolutionary algorithms. Machine learning has also been used for protein design with pre-specified functional sites, predicting molecular properties, and exploring large chemical/reaction spaces.
Using drug discovery AI algorithms, researchers generated 40,000 potential chemical weapon candidates, helping in the regulation of such chemicals to prevent synthesizing them for real harm.
Applications for machine learning in decoding human biology include helping to map gene expression patterns to functional activation patterns or identifying functional DNA motifs. It is widely used in genetic research. There is some use of machine learning in synthetic biology, disease biology, nanotechnology (e.g., nanostructured materials and bionanotechnology), and materials science.
Cyber security companies have used neural networks, machine learning, and natural language processing. Applications of AI in cyber security include:
In the aviation industry, AI is used for optimized operations and predictive maintenance. Companies such as Boeing and Airbus are using AI to optimize repair procedures while maintaining operational performance.
AI is also used in flight simulators which help train pilots. Flight conditions can be simulated that allow pilots to make mistakes without risking themselves or expensive aircraft.
Due to transportation's complexity, training AI in a real-world driving environment is impractical in most cases, and is instead achieved through simulator-based testing. AI-based systems control functions such as braking, lane changing, collision prevention, navigation and mapping. Some autonomous vehicles do not allow human drivers (they have no steering wheels or pedals).
There are prototypes of autonomous automotive public transport vehicles such as autonomous rail transport in operation, electric mini-buses, and autonomous delivery vehicles, including delivery robots.
Autonomous trucks are in the testing phase. The UK government passed legislation to begin testing of autonomous truck platoons in 2018. A group of autonomous trucks follow closely behind each other. German corporation Daimler is testing its Freightliner Inspiration.
AI has been used to optimize traffic management, which can reduce wait times, energy use, and emissions. In 2026, AI tools were in development for hurricane recovery, with the goal of helping transportation officials assess damage more efficiently, improve traffic signal restoration, and better understand transportation needs.
AI has been used in air combat simulations. AI is also impacting military decision-making via intelligence analysis, logistics, surveillance, and strategic planning, e.g., generating recommendations for targets or simulating battlefield scenarios. However, critics had raised concerns about increased safety risks to soldiers and civilians.
Autonomous drones can fly independently or in swarms. The US Air Force has staged dogfights with an AI-flown fighter jet, a VISTA (Variable In-flight Simulator Aircraft). The Air Force is also exploring AI tools to help predict aircraft failures.
AI-supported design of aircraft (AIDA) uses rule-based systems to help designers in the process of creating conceptual designs of aircraft. JetZero is using Siemens Xcelerator's digital twin and AI technologies to build a factory with real-time monitoring and automated quality control, designed to support current and future aircraft manufacturing.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has used AI for space exploration.
In 2003, a Dryden Flight Research Center project created software that could enable a damaged aircraft to continue flight until a safe landing could be achieved. The software compensated for damaged components by relying on the remaining undamaged components.
The 2016 Intelligent Autopilot System combined apprenticeship learning and behavioral cloning whereby the autopilot observed low-level actions required to maneuver the airplane and high-level strategy used to apply those actions.
In 2026, NASA used AI navigation for the Perseverance rover on Mars.
Neural networks are used by situational awareness systems in ships and boats. There also are autonomous boats.
Regulation of artificial intelligence is the development of public sector policies and laws for promoting and regulating artificial intelligence (AI). The regulatory and policy landscape for AI is an emerging issue in jurisdictions worldwide, including for international organizations without direct enforcement power like the IEEE or the OECD.
Since 2016, numerous AI ethics guidelines have been published in order to maintain social control over the technology. Furthermore, organizations deploying AI have a central role to play in creating and implementing trustworthy AI, adhering to established principles, and taking accountability for mitigating risks. The European Union adopted in 2024 a common legal framework for AI with the AI Act.
AI governance is a term used in policy, industry, and academic contexts to describe how AI systems are directed and overseen. A 2025 systematic literature review defined it as encompassing the questions of who is accountable for AI systems, what elements are governed, when governance occurs within the development lifecycle, and how it is implemented through frameworks, tools, or models. Charlotte Stix noted that related terms, including "trustworthy AI", "responsible AI", and "ethical AI", have shifted in meaning over time and are often used interchangeably.
Mitchell Waldrop used the term "machine ethics" in a 1987 article in AI Magazine. The AAAI held a symposium on machine ethics in 2005. Anna Jobin, Marcello Ienca, and Effy Vayena identified 84 sets of AI ethics guidelines published worldwide by 2019, 88% of which had been released after 2016. The guidelines showed agreement on five principles: transparency, justice, non-maleficence, responsibility, and privacy. The Partnership on AI was established in 2016 by Apple, Amazon, Google, Facebook, IBM, and Microsoft. The IEEE launched its Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems in 2016. The initiative published Ethically Aligned Design in 2019.
According to Stanford University's 2025 AI Index, legislative mentions of AI rose 21.3% across 75 countries since 2023, marking a ninefold increase since 2016. The U.S. federal agencies introduced 59 AI-related regulations in 2024—more than double the number in 2023. In 2024, nearly 700 AI-related bills were introduced across 45 states, up from 191 in 2023.
There is currently no broad consensus on the degree or mechanics of AI regulation. Several prominent figures in the field, including Elon Musk, Sam Altman, Dario Amodei, and Demis Hassabis have publicly called for immediate regulation of AI. In 2023, following GPT-4's creation, Elon Musk and others signed an open letter urging a moratorium on the training of more powerful AI systems. Others, such as Mark Zuckerberg and Marc Andreessen, have warned about the risk of preemptive regulation stifling innovation.
In a 2022 Ipsos survey, attitudes towards AI varied greatly by country; 78% of Chinese citizens, but only 35% of Americans, agreed that "products and services using AI have more benefits than drawbacks". Ipsos poll found that 61% of Americans agree, and 22% disagree, that AI poses risks to humanity.
In 2023, the United Kingdom started a series of international summits on AI with the AI Safety Summit. It was followed by the AI Seoul Summit in 2024, the AI Action Summit in Paris in 2025, and the AI Impact Summit in New Delhi in 2026.
The regulation of artificial intelligence is the development of public sector policies and laws for promoting and regulating AI. Public administration and policy considerations generally focus on the technical and economic implications and on trustworthy and human-centered AI systems, regulation of artificial superintelligence, the risks and biases of machine-learning algorithms, the explainability of model outputs, and the tension between open source AI and unchecked AI use.
There have been both hard law and soft law proposals to regulate AI. Some legal scholars have noted that hard law approaches to AI regulation have substantial challenges. Among the challenges, AI technology is rapidly evolving leading to a "pacing problem" where traditional laws and regulations often cannot keep up with emerging applications and their associated risks and benefits. Similarly, the diversity of AI applications challenges existing regulatory agencies, which often have limited jurisdictional scope. As an alternative, some legal scholars argue that soft law approaches to AI regulation are promising, as they offer greater flexibility to adapt to emerging technologies and the evolving nature of AI applications. However, soft law approaches often lack substantial enforcement potential.
Cason Schmit, Megan Doerr, and Jennifer Wagner proposed the creation of a quasi-governmental regulator by leveraging intellectual property rights (i.e., copyleft licensing) in certain AI objects (i.e., AI models and training datasets) and delegating enforcement rights to a designated enforcement entity. They argue that AI can be licensed under terms that require adherence to specified ethical practices and codes of conduct. (e.g., soft law principles).
Prominent youth organizations focused on AI, namely Encode AI, have also issued comprehensive agendas calling for more stringent AI regulations and public-private partnerships.
AI regulation could derive from basic principles. A 2020 Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society meta-review of existing sets of principles, such as the Asilomar Principles and the Beijing Principles, identified eight such basic principles: privacy, accountability, safety and security, transparency and explainability, fairness and non-discrimination, human control of technology, professional responsibility, and respect for human values. AI law and regulations have been divided into three main topics, namely governance of autonomous intelligence systems, responsibility and accountability for the systems, and privacy and safety issues. A public administration approach sees a relationship between AI law and regulation, the ethics of AI, and 'AI society', defined as workforce substitution and transformation, social acceptance and trust in AI, and the transformation of human to machine interaction. The development of public sector strategies for management and regulation of AI is deemed necessary at the local, national, and international levels and in a variety of fields, from public service management and accountability to law enforcement, healthcare (especially the concept of a Human Guarantee), the financial sector, robotics, autonomous vehicles, the military and national security, and international law.
Henry Kissinger, Eric Schmidt, and Daniel Huttenlocher published a joint statement in November 2021 entitled "Being Human in an Age of AI", calling for a government commission to regulate AI.
A 2025 study found competition law and competition regulators face challenges in preventing a winner-take-all market for AI.
In 2025, the UK and US governments declined to sign an international agreement on AI at the AI Action Summit in Paris. The agreement was described as proposing an open, inclusive and ethical approach to AI development, including environmental protection measures. US Vice President JD Vance argued that the agreement would be detrimental to the growth of the AI industry. The UK government added that the agreement "didn't provide enough practical clarity on global governance, nor sufficiently address harder questions around national security".
Regulation of AI can be seen as positive social means to manage the AI control problem (the need to ensure long-term beneficial AI), with other social responses such as doing nothing or banning being seen as impractical, and approaches such as enhancing human capabilities through transhumanism techniques like brain-computer interfaces being seen as potentially complementary. Regulation of research into artificial general intelligence (AGI) focuses on the role of review boards, from university or corporation to international levels, and on encouraging research into AI safety, together with the possibility of differential intellectual progress (prioritizing protective strategies over risky strategies in AI development) or conducting international mass surveillance to perform AGI arms control. For instance, the 'AGI Nanny' is a proposed strategy, potentially under the control of humanity, for preventing the creation of a dangerous superintelligence as well as for addressing other major threats to human well-being, such as subversion of the global financial system, until a true superintelligence can be safely created. It entails the creation of a smarter-than-human, but not superintelligent, AGI system connected to a large surveillance network, with the goal of monitoring humanity and protecting it from danger. Regulation of conscious, ethically aware AGIs focuses on how to integrate them with existing human society and can be divided into considerations of their legal standing and of their moral rights. Regulation of AI has been seen as restrictive, with a risk of preventing the development of AGI.
The increased development and deployment of AI agents has shifted regulation discussion beyond generative AI. Agentic AI regulation is in early stages compared to generative AI systems, which have already had many regulations implemented or proposed. AI agents are more complex, more autonomous, and have less human oversight.
Kathrin Gardhouse et al. propose the idea of the many-hands problem through the lens of the EU Artificial Intelligence Act. Standard generative AI systems can be evaluated at the deployment stage. Then they can receive human oversight for each action as a single entity. AI agents, on the other hand, can work with multiple actors within multiple systems. This makes regulating their actions more difficult, especially when AI agents are compounded. Gardhouse et al. argue that AI agents have too many dynamic variables to have specific regulations based on fixed points in time. This may require more focus on system environments, record-keeping, and the agents themselves.
AI agents, by design, function with more limited human oversight. Recent articles, such as Governing AI Agents, convey doubts over whether regulatory frameworks for generative AI can effectively solve regulatory issues for AI agents. One approach is to have other deep learning systems or AI agents specifically monitor subsequent AI agents as an oversight measure. However, researchers maintain concerns that those could lead to the same types of vulnerabilities.
On June 29, 2026, United States Senator Mark Warner put forward a discussion draft for the Artificial Intelligence Access, Gatekeeper Exchange, and Nondiscriminatory Transfer Act (AI AGENT Act). This proposed discussion draft is geared toward a federal framework for consumer-facing AI agents. Access to large platforms, privacy, and security are the main concerns.
Under the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, states have held discussions since 2014 on possible international rules for lethal autonomous weapon systems, an important area of AI regulation in warfare. Notably, informal meetings of experts took place in 2014, 2015 and 2016 and a Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) was appointed to further deliberate on the issue in 2016. A set of guiding principles on LAWS affirmed by the GGE on LAWS were adopted in 2018.  The discussions have addressed international humanitarian law, accountability, possible prohibitions and regulations, and the extent of human control required over AI-enabled weapons.
In 2016, China published a position paper questioning the adequacy of existing international law to address the eventuality of fully autonomous weapons, becoming the first permanent member of the U.N. Security Council to broach the issue, and leading to proposals for global regulation. The possibility of a moratorium or preemptive ban of the development and use of LAWS has also been raised on several occasions by other national delegations to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons and is strongly advocated for by the Campaign to Stop Killer Robots – a coalition of non-governmental organizations. The US government maintains that current international humanitarian law is capable of regulating the development or use of LAWS. The Congressional Research Service indicated in 2023 that the US does not have LAWS in its inventory, but that its policy does not prohibit the development and employment of it.
The development of a global governance board to regulate AI development was suggested at least as early as 2017. In December 2018, Canada and France announced plans for a G7-backed International Panel on Artificial Intelligence, modeled on the International Panel on Climate Change, to study the global effects of AI on people and economies and to steer AI development. In 2019, the Panel was renamed the Global Partnership on AI.
The Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI) was launched in June 2020, stating a need for AI to be developed in accordance with human rights and democratic values, to ensure public confidence and trust in the technology, as outlined in the OECD Principles on Artificial Intelligence (2019). The 15 founding members of the Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence are Australia, Canada, the European Union, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Mexico, New Zealand, Singapore, Slovenia, the United States and the UK. In 2023, the GPAI has 29 members. The GPAI Secretariat is hosted by the OECD in Paris, France. GPAI's mandate covers four themes, two of which are supported by the International Centre of Expertise in Montréal for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, namely, responsible AI and data governance. A corresponding centre of excellence in Paris will support the other two themes on the future of work, and on innovation and commercialization. GPAI also investigated how AI can be leveraged to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. The GPAI, the OECD AI Policy Observatory, and the United Nations High-Level Advisory Body on Artificial Intelligence serve as multilateral coordination bodies.
At the United Nations (UN), several entities have begun to promote and discuss aspects of AI regulation and policy, including the UNICRI Centre for AI and Robotics. In partnership with INTERPOL, UNICRI's Centre issued the report AI and Robotics for Law Enforcement in April 2019 and the follow-up report Towards Responsible AI Innovation in May 2020. At UNESCO's Scientific 40th session in November 2019, the organization commenced a two-year process to achieve a "global standard-setting instrument on ethics of artificial intelligence". In pursuit of this goal, UNESCO forums and conferences on AI were held to gather stakeholder views. A draft text of a Recommendation on the Ethics of AI of the UNESCO Ad Hoc Expert Group was issued in September 2020 and included a call for legislative gaps to be filled. UNESCO tabled the international instrument on the ethics of AI for adoption at its General Conference in November 2021; this was subsequently adopted by all 193 member states. While the UN is making progress with the global management of AI, its institutional and legal capability to manage the AGI existential risk is more limited.
On August 26, 2025, the United Nations Resolution A/RES/79/325 established the Independent International Scientific Panel on AI and the Global Dialogue on AI Governance. The UN calls the panel the "first global scientific body on Artificial Intelligence".  The resolution mandates the panel to produce an annual report using evidence-based scientific assessments on the opportunities, risks, and impacts of artificial intelligence. The report is to be presented every year at the Global Dialogue on AI Governance. The panel may also prepare briefs on issues of concern, provide biannual updates to the General Assembly, form working groups, or act as informal consultants. In 2026, the first session of the Global Dialogue on AI Governance will take place in Geneva, Switzerland on July 6 and 7. It will be co-chaired by Egriselda López (Permanent Representative of El Salvador to the United Nations) and Rein Tammsaar (Permanent Representative of Estonia to the United Nations).
In recent years, academic researchers have made more efforts to promote multilateral dialogue and policy development, advocating for the adoption of international frameworks that govern the deployment of AI in military and cybersecurity contexts, with a strong emphasis on human rights and international humanitarian law. Initiatives such as the Munich Convention on AI, Data and Human Rights, which brought together scholars from various academic institutions, have called for a binding international agreement to protect human rights in the age of AI. A key element of such initiatives is identifying common ground between different regional approaches, such as those of the African Union and the Council of Europe.
In September 2025, a global call for AI red lines was presented at the United Nations General Assembly, urging governments to reach a binding agreement prohibiting unacceptable AI uses and behaviors by the end of 2026.
The OECD's Recommendation on Artificial Intelligence and its AI Principles were adopted in May 2019 (and amended in 2024). The framework includes five value-based principles: inclusive growth, human-centred values, transparency, robustness, and accountability. More than 40 countries have adopted it. The G20 AI Principles followed in June 2019. In September 2019 the World Economic Forum issued ten "AI Government Procurement Guidelines".
The AI Safety Summit was held at Bletchley Park in November 2023. The AI Seoul Summit took place in 2024. The AI Action Summit was held in Paris in February 2025. The India AI Impact Summit took place in New Delhi in February 2026.
The regulatory and policy landscape for AI is an emerging issue in regional and national jurisdictions globally, for example in the European Union and Russia. Since early 2016, many national, regional and international authorities have begun adopting strategies, actions plans and policy papers on AI. These documents cover a wide range of topics such as regulation and governance, as well as industrial strategy, research, talent and infrastructure.
Different countries have approached the problem in different ways. Regarding the three largest economies, it has been said by Anu Bradford, a law professor at Columbia University, that "the United States is following a market-driven approach, China is advancing a state-driven approach, and the EU is pursuing a rights-driven approach."
The African Union has increasingly been active in the field. Most importantly, the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights published a study on AI and human rights and advocated for an African Framework Convention on AI and Human Rights. This initiative builds on earlier debates within the AU, particularly discussions on autonomous lethal weapons, which African representatives had previously raised in international forums.
A distinctive feature of the proposed African Framework is its strong emphasis on collective rights, as enshrined in the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights. This approach is situated within the broader debate on aligning AI governance with African values, including ethical traditions such as Ubuntu ("humanity to others").
As of 2025[update], Australia has not passed AI-specific laws, but existing statutes such as the Privacy Act 1988, Corporations Act 2001, and Online Safety Act 2021 affect AI use.
In October 2023, the Australian Computer Society, Business Council of Australia, Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Ai Group (aka Australian Industry Group), Council of Small Business Organisations Australia, and Tech Council of Australia jointly published an open letter calling for a national approach to AI strategy. The letter backs the federal government establishing a whole-of-government AI taskforce.
In August 2024, the Australian government set a Voluntary AI Safety Standard, which was followed by a Proposals Paper later in September of that year, outlining potential guardrails for high-risk AI that could become mandatory. These guardrails include areas such as model testing, transparency, human oversight, and record-keeping, all of which may be enforced through new legislation.
In September 2024, a bill was introduced which granted the Australian Communications and Media Authority powers to regulate AI-generated misinformation. Several agencies, including the ACMA, ACCC, and Office of the Australian Information Commissioner, are all expected to play roles in future AI regulation.
The South Australian Government appointed a Minister for Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy for the state of South Australia in March 2026. In the same year, Global Index on Responsible AI (GIRAI), ranked Australia 23rd globally out of 135 countries, 1st in the Asia-Pacific region, and 22nd among high-income countries.
On September 30, 2021, the Brazilian Chamber of Deputies (Câmara dos Deputados) approved the Brazilian Legal Framework for Artificial Intelligence (Marco Legal da Inteligência Artificial). This legislation aimed to regulate AI development and usage while promoting research and innovation in ethical AI solutions that prioritize culture, justice, fairness, and accountability. The 10-article bill established several key objectives: developing ethical principles for AI, promoting sustained research investment, and removing barriers to innovation. Article 4 specifically emphasized preventing discriminatory AI solutions, ensuring plurality, and protecting human rights.
When the bill was first released to the public, it faced substantial criticism, alarming the government for critical provisions. The underlying issue is that this bill failed to thoroughly and carefully address accountability, transparency, and inclusivity principles. Article VI establishes subjective liability, meaning any individual that is damaged by an AI system and is wishing to receive compensation must specify the stakeholder and prove that there was a mistake in the machine's life cycle. Scholars emphasize that it is out of legal order to assign an individual responsible for proving algorithmic errors given the high degree of autonomy, unpredictability, and complexity of AI systems. This also drew attention to the currently occurring issues with face recognition systems in Brazil leading to unjust arrests by the police, which would then imply that when this bill is adopted, individuals would have to prove and justify these machine errors.
The main controversy of this draft bill was directed to three proposed principles. First, the non-discrimination principle, suggests that AI must be developed and used in a way that merely mitigates the possibility of abusive and discriminatory practices. Secondly, the pursuit of neutrality principle lists recommendations for stakeholders to mitigate biases; however, with no obligation to achieve this goal. Lastly, the transparency principle states that a system's transparency is only necessary when there is a high risk of violating fundamental rights. As easily observed, the Brazilian Legal Framework for Artificial Intelligence lacks binding and obligatory clauses and is rather filled with relaxed guidelines. In fact, experts emphasize that this bill may even make accountability for AI discriminatory biases even harder to achieve. Compared to the EU's proposal of extensive risk-based regulations, the Brazilian Bill has 10 articles proposing vague and generic recommendations.
The Brazilian AI Bill lacks the diverse perspectives that characterized earlier Brazilian internet legislation. When Brazil drafted the Marco Civil da Internet (Brazilian Internet Bill of Rights) in the 2000s, it used a multistakeholder approach that brought together various groups—including government, civil society, academia, and industry—to participate in dialogue, decision-making, and implementation. This collaborative process helps capture different viewpoints and trade-offs among stakeholders with varying interests, ultimately improving transparency and effectiveness in AI regulation.
In May 2023, a new bill was passed, superseding the 2021 bill. It calls for risk assessments of AI systems before deployment and distinguishes "high risk" and "excessive risk" systems. The latter are characterized by their potential to expose or exploit vulnerabilities and will be subject to regulation by the Executive Branch. In the 2026 Global Index on Responsible AI, Brazil was ranked 11th globally out of 135 countries, 1st in South and Central America, and 1st among upper-middle-income countries.
The Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy (2017) is supported by federal funding of Can $125 million with the objectives of increasing the number of outstanding AI researchers and skilled graduates in Canada, establishing nodes of scientific excellence at the three major AI centres, developing 'global thought leadership' on the economic, ethical, policy and legal implications of AI advances and supporting a national research community working on AI. The Canada CIFAR AI Chairs Program is the cornerstone of the strategy. It benefits from funding of Can$86.5 million over five years to attract and retain world-renowned AI researchers. The federal government appointed an Advisory Council on AI in May 2019 with a focus on examining how to build on Canada's strengths to ensure that AI advancements reflect Canadian values, such as human rights, transparency and openness. The Advisory Council on AI has established a working group on extracting commercial value from Canadian-owned AI and data analytics. In 2020, the federal government and Government of Quebec announced the opening of the International Centre of Expertise in Montréal for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, which will advance the cause of responsible development of AI. In June 2022, the government of Canada started a second phase of the Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy. In November 2022, Canada has introduced the Digital Charter Implementation Act (Bill C-27), which proposes three acts that have been described as a holistic package of legislation for trust and privacy: the Consumer Privacy Protection Act, the Personal Information and Data Protection Tribunal Act, and the Artificial Intelligence & Data Act (AIDA).
In September 2023, the Canadian Government introduced a Voluntary Code of Conduct for the Responsible Development and Management of Advanced generative AI Systems. The code, based initially on public consultations, seeks to provide interim guidance to Canadian companies on responsible AI practices. Ultimately, it is intended to serve as a stopgap until formal legislation, such as the Artificial Intelligence and Data Act (AIDA), is enacted. Moreover, in November 2024, the Canadian government announced the creation of the Canadian Artificial Intelligence Safety Institute (CAISI) as part of a 2.4 billion CAD federal AI investment package. This includes 2 billion CAD to support a new AI Sovereign Computing Strategy and the AI Computing Access Fund, which aims to bolster Canada's advanced computing infrastructure. Further funding includes 700 million CAD for domestic AI development, 1 billion CAD for public supercomputing infrastructure, and 300 million CAD to assist companies in accessing new AI resources.
In the 2026 Global Index on Responsible AI, Canada was ranked 25th globally out of 135 countries, 1st in Northern America, and 24th among high-income countries.
The regulation of AI in China is mainly governed by the State Council of the People's Republic of China's July 8, 2017 "A Next Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan" (State Council Document No. 35), in which the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party and the State Council of the PRC urged the governing bodies of China to promote the development of AI up to 2030. Regulation of the issues of ethical and legal support for the development of AI is accelerating, and policy ensures state control of Chinese companies and over valuable data, including storage of data on Chinese users within the country and the mandatory use of People's Republic of China's national standards for AI, including over big data, cloud computing, and industrial software. In 2021, China published ethical guidelines for the use of AI in China which state that researchers must ensure that AI abides by shared human values, is always under human control, and is not endangering public safety. In 2023, China introduced Interim Measures for the Management of Generative AI Services.
On August 15, 2023, China's first generative AI measures officially came into force, becoming one of the first comprehensive national regulatory frameworks for generative AI. The measures apply to all providers offering generative AI services to the Chinese public, including foreign entities, ultimately setting the rules related to data protection, transparency, and algorithmic accountability.
In April 2026, China's National Development and Reform Commission ordered Meta to unwind its $2 billion acquisition of Manus, an AI startup that had relocated from China to Singapore in 2025. This marks a rare move to block a completed cross-border tech deal. The decision signals Beijing's effort to prevent foreign firms from acquiring Chinese AI talent and intellectual property, establishing national security review as a regular condition for cross-border technology transactions involving Chinese assets, founders, or technology.
In parallel, earlier regulations such as the Chinese government's Deep Synthesis Provisions (effective January 2023) and the Algorithm Recommendation Provisions (effective March 2022) continue to shape China's governance of AI-driven systems, including requirements for watermarking and algorithm filing with the Cyberspace Administration of China (CAC). Additionally, In October 2023, China also implemented a set of Ethics Review Measures for science and technology, mandating certain ethical assessments of AI projects which were deemed socially sensitive or capable of negatively influencing public opinion. As of mid-2024, over 1,400 AI algorithms had been already registered under the CAC's algorithm filing regime, which includes disclosure requirements and penalties for noncompliance. This layered approach reflects a broader policy process shaped by not only central directives but also academic input, civil society concerns, and public discourse.
Later procedures set out detailed mandatory AI content labeling rules. In 2025, Chinese regulators issued the Measures for Labeling of AI-Generated Synthetic Content. These procedures standardize the use of on-screen disclosure labels and embedded provenance metadata for AI-generated text, images, audio, video, and virtual scenes. Additionally, they introduce a mandatory requirement for online service providers to disclose their name or code and content reference number in the embedded metadata, encourage the use of digital watermarking, require online content platforms to detect or infer AI-generated material and add conspicuous consumer disclosures, and mandate that providers describe their labeling methods in online terms of service.
In the 2026 Global Index on Responsible AI, China was ranked 42nd globally out of 135 countries, 7th in Asia-Pacific, and 6th among upper-middle-income countries.
Although Colombia has not issued specific AI laws, this does not mean there is a lack of frameworks or initiatives to govern it. In fact, there are numerous instruments issued for that purpose, including national policies, ethical frameworks, roadmaps, rulings, and guidelines. In addition, there are other existing regulations applicable to AI systems, such as data protection, intellectual property, consumer laws, and civil liability rules.
One of the first specific instruments issued was the CONPES 3920 of 2019, the National Policy on Exploitation of Data (Big Data). The main purpose of this policy was to leverage data in Colombia by creating the conditions to handle it as an asset to generate social and economic value.
Another milestone occurred in 2021, when the National Government published the Ethical Framework for AI in Colombia. It was a soft law guide for public entities, offering recommendations to consider in the management of AI-related projects.
An additional framework for AI was adopted by Colombia in 2022: the Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence by UNESCO. It includes values and principles applicable in the public and private sectors in all stages of the AI system life cycle.
A regional political commitment on AI was made in 2023, involving Latin American and Caribbean countries. It was called the Declaration of Santiago, whose main purpose is to promote ethical AI in the region.
2024 was a prolific year in governing AI in Colombia. A roadmap for an ethical and sustainable AI adoption was launched by the National Government. The Superintendence of Industry and Commerce issued a guide on the processing of personal data in AI systems. The Judiciary Council published a guideline for the use of AI in the judicial sector. In the global context, the OECD principles were updated, the Global Digital Compact by the United Nations was published, and the UN adopted Resolution A/78/L.49 on safe, trustworthy, and reliable AI systems for sustainable development.
In 2025, a new national policy on AI was issued by the National Government, contained in CONPES 4144. The ruling T-067/25 by the Constitutional Court provided some rules for access to public information and transparency of algorithms.
Until Congress issues AI regulations, these soft-law documents can guide the design, development, and use of AI systems in Colombia.
In the 2026 Global Index on Responsible AI, Colombia was ranked 26th globally out of 135 countries, 4th in South and Central America, and 2nd among upper-middle-income countries.
The Council of Europe (CoE) is an international organization that promotes human rights, democracy and the rule of law. It comprises 46 member states, including all 29 Signatories of the European Union's 2018 Declaration of Cooperation on Artificial Intelligence. The CoE has created a common legal space in which the members have a legal obligation to guarantee rights as set out in the European Convention on Human Rights. Specifically in relation to AI, "The Council of Europe's aim is to identify intersecting areas between AI and our standards on human rights, democracy and rule of law, and to develop relevant standard setting or capacity-building solutions". The large number of relevant documents identified by the CoE include guidelines, charters, papers, reports and strategies. The authoring bodies of these AI regulation documents are not confined to one sector of society and include organizations, companies, bodies and nation-states.
In 2019, the Council of Europe initiated a process to assess the need for legally binding regulation of AI, focusing specifically on its implications for human rights and democratic values. Negotiations on a treaty began in September 2022, involving the 46 member states of the Council of Europe, as well as Argentina, Australia, Canada, Costa Rica, the Holy See, Israel, Japan, Mexico, Peru, the United States of America, and Uruguay, as well as the European Union. On 17 May 2024, the "Framework Convention on Artificial Intelligence and Human Rights, Democracy and the Rule of Law" was adopted. It was opened for signature on 5 September 2024. Although developed by a European organisation, the treaty is open for accession by states from other parts of the world. The first ten signatories were: Andorra, Georgia, Iceland, Norway, Moldova, San Marino, the United Kingdom, Israel, the United States, and the European Union. It is the first multinational treaty on AI. As of January 2026, 19 parties had signed it.
The Czech Republic adopted a National AI Strategy in 2019 and updated it in 2024 with the National AI Strategy of the Czech Republic 2030. The updated strategy includes a provision to ensure effective legislation, to create codes of ethics for developers and users, to establish supervisory bodies and to promote the ethical use of AI.
The EU is one of the largest jurisdictions in the world and plays an active role in the global regulation of digital technology through the GDPR, Digital Services Act, and the Digital Markets Act. For AI in particular, the Artificial intelligence Act was regarded as the most far-reaching regulation of AI worldwide in 2023.
Most European Union (EU) countries have their own national strategies towards regulating AI, but these are largely convergent. The European Union is guided by a European Strategy on Artificial Intelligence, supported by a High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence. In April 2019, the European Commission published its Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence (AI), following this with its Policy and investment recommendations for trustworthy Artificial Intelligence in June 2019. The EU Commission's High Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence carries out work on Trustworthy AI, and the commission has issued reports on the Safety and Liability Aspects of AI and on the Ethics of Automated Vehicles. In 2020. the EU Commission sought views on a proposal for AI specific legislation, and that process is ongoing.
On February 2, 2020, the European Commission published its White Paper on Artificial Intelligence – A European approach to excellence and trust. The White Paper consists of two main building blocks, an 'ecosystem of excellence' and a 'ecosystem of trust'. The 'ecosystem of trust' outlines the EU's approach for a regulatory framework for AI. In its proposed approach, the Commission distinguishes AI applications based on whether they are 'high-risk' or not. Only high-risk AI applications should be in the scope of a future EU regulatory framework. An AI application is considered high-risk if it operates in a risky sector (such as healthcare, transport or energy) and is "used in such a manner that significant risks are likely to arise". For high-risk AI applications, the requirements are mainly about the : "training data", "data and record-keeping", "information to be provided", "robustness and accuracy", and "human oversight". The NIST AI RMF addresses oversight through its GOVERN function. ISO 37000 assigns ultimate accountability for organisational conduct to the governing body.
There are also requirements specific to certain usages such as remote biometric identification. AI applications that do not qualify as 'high-risk' could be governed by a voluntary labeling scheme. As regards compliance and enforcement, the Commission considers prior conformity assessments which could include "procedures for testing, inspection or certification" and/or "checks of the algorithms and of the data sets used in the development phase". A European governance structure on AI in the form of a framework for cooperation of national competent authorities could facilitate the implementation of the regulatory framework.
A January 2021 draft was leaked online on April 14, 2021, before the Commission presented their official "Proposal for a Regulation laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence" a week later. Shortly after, the Artificial Intelligence Act (also known as the AI Act) was formally proposed on this basis. This proposal includes a refinement of the 2020 risk-based approach with, this time, 4 risk categories: "minimal", "limited", "high" and "unacceptable". The proposal has been severely critiqued in the public debate. Academics have expressed concerns about various unclear elements in the proposal – such as the broad definition of what constitutes AI – and feared unintended legal implications, especially for vulnerable groups such as patients and migrants. The risk category "general-purpose AI" was added to the AI Act to account for versatile models like ChatGPT, which did not fit the application-based regulation framework. Unlike for other risk categories, general-purpose AI models can be regulated based on their capabilities, not just their uses. Weaker general-purpose AI models are subject transparency requirements, while those considered to pose "systemic risks" (notably those trained using computational capabilities exceeding 1025 FLOPS) must also undergo a thorough evaluation process. A subsequent version of the AI Act was finally adopted in May 2024. The AI Act will be progressively enforced. Recognition of emotions and real-time remote biometric identification will be prohibited, with some exemptions, such as for law enforcement.
The European Union's AI Act has created a regulatory framework with significant global implications. This legislation introduces a risk-based approach to categorizing AI systems, focusing on high-risk applications like healthcare, education, and public safety. It requires organizations to ensure transparency, data governance, and human oversight in their AI solutions. While this aims to foster ethical AI use, the stringent requirements could increase overhead and compliance costs, delaying certain AI designs and deployments.
Observers have expressed concerns about the multiplication of legislative proposals under the von der Leyen Commission. The speed of the legislative initiatives is partially led by political ambitions of the EU and could put at risk the digital rights of the European citizens, including rights to privacy, especially in the face of uncertain guarantees of data protection through cyber security. Among the stated guiding principles in the variety of legislative proposals in the area of AI under the von der Leyen Commission are the objectives of strategic autonomy and the concept of digital sovereignty. On May 29, 2024, the European Court of Auditors published a report stating that EU measures were not well coordinated with those of EU countries; that the monitoring of investments was not systematic; and that stronger governance was needed.
The EU's Artificial Intelligence Act (Regulation (EU) 2024/1689) entered into force on 1 August 2024, creating a risk-based legal framework for AI systems, including special provisions for general-purpose AI models enforceable by 2 August 2025. It classifies AI applications by risk level. Article 14 requires human oversight capabilities for high-risk AI systems. The Framework Convention on Artificial Intelligence was opened for signature on 5 September 2024 under the Council of Europe.
The EU Artificial Intelligence Act from 2024 is implemented in rolling stages rather than all at once. August 2, 2026 marks the date when the transparency rules under Article 50 officially apply and require enforcement. These rules include labeling certain content that was AI-generated and disclosure when users are interacting with AI chatbots and agents. Rollouts continue through 2027, reaching a final milestone on August 2, 2028, which includes regulation for high-risk AI in products.
On 30 October 2023, the Group of Seven (G7) nations adopted a set of eleven guiding principles relating to the design, development and deployment of advanced artificial intelligence systems. These principles form part of the Hiroshima Process, a framework aimed at ensuring that AI technologies are implemented responsibly across global markets. Alongside these principles, a voluntary Code of Conduct for AI developers was introduced to encourage transparency, accountability, and risk-mitigation in emerging AI models and platforms.
New guidelines also aim to establish a coordinated global effort towards the responsible development and use of advanced AI systems. While non-binding, the G7 governments encourage organizations to voluntarily adopt the guidelines, which emphasize a risk-based approach across the AI lifecycle—from pre-deployment risk assessment to post-deployment incident reporting and mitigation.
The AI Principles and Code of Conduct (AIP&CoC) also highlight the importance of AI system security, internal adversarial testing ('red teaming'), public transparency about capabilities and limitations, and governance procedures that include privacy safeguards and content authentication tools. The guidelines additionally promote AI innovation directed at solving global challenges such as climate change and public health, and call for advancing international technical standards.
Looking ahead, the G7 intends to further refine their principles and Code of Conduct in collaboration with other organizations like the OECD, GPAI, and broader stakeholders. Areas of broader development include clearer AI terminology (e.g., "advanced AI systems"), the setting of risk benchmarks, and mechanisms for cross-border information sharing on potential AI risks. Despite general alignment on AI safety, analysts have noted that differing regulatory philosophies—such as the EU's prescriptive AI Act versus the U.S.'s sector-specific approach—may challenge global regulatory harmonization.
Finland has appointed a working group to evaluate what national legislation is required by the EU Artificial intelligence Act, and to prepare a legislative proposal on its national implementation. The working group began its evaluation on April 29, 2024, and is expected to conclude by June 30, 2026.
In the first stage of national implementation, legislation defining the powers of the supervisory authorities and the system of administrative penalties was approved by the President of the Republic on 22 December 2025 and entered into force on 1 January 2026. Finland adopted a decentralised supervision model, dividing oversight among existing market surveillance authorities according to an AI system's purpose of use, with the Finnish Transport and Communications Agency (Traficom) acting as the single point of contact. A second stage, covering an AI regulatory sandbox and a national register for high-risk AI systems related to critical infrastructure, was expected to take effect around the Act's full application date of 2 August 2026.
In November 2020, DIN, DKE and the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy published the first edition of the "German Standardization Roadmap for Artificial Intelligence" (NRM KI) and presented it to the public at the Digital Summit of the Federal Government of Germany. NRM KI describes requirements to future regulations and standards in the context of AI. The implementation of the recommendations for action is intended to help to strengthen the German economy and science in the international competition in the field of artificial intelligence and create innovation-friendly conditions for this emerging technology. The first edition is a 200-page long document written by 300 experts. The second edition of the NRM KI was published to coincide with the German government's Digital Summit on December 9, 2022. DIN coordinated more than 570 participating experts from a wide range of fields from science, industry, civil society and the public sector. The second edition is a 450-page long document.
On the one hand, NRM KI covers the focus topics in terms of applications (e.g. medicine, mobility, energy & environment, financial services, industrial automation) and fundamental issues (e.g. AI classification, security, certifiability, socio-technical systems, ethics). On the other hand, it provides an overview of the central terms in the field of AI and its environment across a wide range of interest groups and information sources. In total, the document covers 116 standardisation needs and provides six central recommendations for action.
In the 2026 Global Index on Responsible AI, Germany was ranked 6th globally out of 135 countries, 6th in Europe, and 6th among high-income countries.
IndiaAI was established in 2024, and an IndiaAI Safety Institute the following year.
The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 were amended by a notification given on February 10, 2026 (G.S.R. 120(E)). The amendments introduce intermediary regulations for AI or synthetically generated content. Although India still does not have a binding standalone AI law, the amendments came into force on February 20, 2026, outlining new rules for synthetically generated content and information. These cover unlawful content, synthetically generated content labeling with permanently embedded metadata where possible, and changes to content removal responses. Although this is an amended framework for dealing with AI-based content, it also stipulates obligations that intermediaries must follow or risk changes in legal protections.
In the 2026 Global Index on Responsible AI, India was ranked 46th globally out of 135 countries, 9th in Asia-Pacific, and 3rd among lower-middle-income countries.
On October 30, 2022, pursuant to government resolution 212 of August 2021, the Israeli Ministry of Innovation, Science and Technology released its "Principles of Policy, Regulation and Ethics in AI" white paper for public consultation. By December 2023, the Ministry of Innovation and the Ministry of Justice published a joint AI regulation and ethics policy paper, outlining several AI ethical principles and a set of recommendations including opting for sector-based regulation, a risk-based approach, preference for "soft" regulatory tools such as AI sandboxes and maintaining consistency with existing global regulatory approaches to AI.
In December 2023, Israel unveiled its first comprehensive national AI policy, which was jointly developed through a collaboration between ministers and stakeholders. In general, the new policy outlines ethical principles aligned with current OECD guidelines and recommends a sector-based, risk-driven regulatory framework, which focuses on areas like transparency and accountability. The policy proposes the creation of a national AI Policy Coordination Center to support regulators and further develop the tools necessary for responsible AI deployment. In addition to domestic policy development, alongside 56 other nations, Israel signed in March 2024 the world's first binding international treaty on artificial intelligence. This treaty, led by the Council of Europe and named the Framework Convention on Artificial Intelligence, has obliged signatories to ensure current AI systems uphold democratic values, human rights, and the rule of law.
In October 2023, the Italian privacy authority approved a regulation that provides three principles for therapeutic decisions taken by automated systems: transparency of decision-making processes, human supervision of automated decisions and algorithmic non-discrimination.
In March 2024, the President of the Italian Data Protection Authority reaffirmed the agency's readiness to implement the European Union's newly introduced Artificial Intelligence Act, praising the framework of institutional competence and independence. Italy has continued to develop guidance on AI applications through existing legal frameworks, including recent innovations in areas such as facial recognition for law enforcement, AI in healthcare, deepfakes, and smart assistants. The Italian government's National AI Strategy (2022–2024) emphasizes responsible innovation and outlines goals for talent development, public and private sector adoption, and regulatory clarity, particularly in coordination with EU-level initiatives. While Italy has not enacted standalone AI legislation, courts and regulators have begun interpreting existing laws to address transparency, non-discrimination, and human oversight in algorithmic decision-making.
In the 2026 Global Index on Responsible AI, Italy was ranked 2nd globally out of 135 countries, 2nd in Europe, and 2nd among high-income countries.
In Morocco, a new legislative proposal has been put forward by a coalition of political parties in Parliament to establish the National Agency for Artificial Intelligence (AI). This agency is intended to regulate AI technologies, enhance collaboration with international entities in the field, and increase public awareness of both the possibilities and risks associated with AI.
In recent years, Morocco has made efforts to advance its use of artificial intelligence in the legal sector, particularly through AI tools that assist with judicial prediction and document analysis, helping to streamline case law research and support legal practitioners with more complex tasks. Alongside these efforts to establish a national AI agency, AI is being gradually introduced into legislative and judicial processes in Morocco, with ongoing discussions emphasizing the benefits as well as the potential risks of these technologies.
Generally speaking, Morocco's broader digital policy includes robust data governance measures including the 2009 Personal Data Protection Law and the 2020 Cybersecurity Law, which establish requirements in areas such as privacy, breach notification, and data localization. As of 2024, additional decrees have also expanded cybersecurity standards for cloud infrastructure and data audits within the nation. And while general data localization is not mandated, sensitive government and critical infrastructure data must be stored domestically. Oversight is led by the National Commission for the Protection of Personal Data (CNDP) and the General Directorate of Information Systems Security (DGSSI), though public enforcement actions in the country remain limited.
As of July 2023[update], no AI-specific legislation exists, but AI usage is regulated by existing laws, including the Privacy Act, the Human Rights Act, the Fair Trading Act and the Harmful Digital Communications Act.
In 2020, the New Zealand Government sponsored a World Economic Forum pilot project titled "Reimagining Regulation for the Age of AI", aimed at creating regulatory frameworks around AI. The same year, the Privacy Act was updated to regulate the use of New Zealanders' personal information in AI. In 2023, the Privacy Commissioner released guidance on using AI in accordance with information privacy principles. In February 2024, the Attorney-General and Technology Minister announced the formation of a Parliamentary cross-party AI caucus, and that framework for the Government's use of AI was being developed. She also announced that no extra regulation was planned at that stage.
In 2023, a bill was filed in the Philippine House of Representatives which proposed the establishment of the Artificial Intelligence Development Authority (AIDA) which would oversee the development and research of artificial intelligence. AIDA was also proposed to be a watchdog against crimes using AI.
The Commission on Elections has also considered in 2024 the ban of using AI and deepfake for campaigning. They look to implement regulations that would apply as early as for the 2025 general elections.
In the 2026 edition of the Global Index on Responsible AI (GIRAI), the Philippines was ranked 68th out of 135 countries
In December 2024, South Korea passed the Act on the Development of Artificial Intelligence and Establishment of Trust (AI Basic Act). The act established legal grounds for creating a national AI control tower, an AI safety institute, and various other government initiatives for AI-related research, standardization and policies. As part of the AI Basic Act, businesses that develop and deploy generative AI are responsible for safety and transparency, including implementing risk assessments.
In July 2026, the Act on Promotion of Industrial Digital Transformation and Utilization of Artificial Intelligence (Act No. 21250) came into effect. The amendments to this Act require those who profit from industrial data to prevent loss, theft, alteration or damage to that data. If these obligations are violated intentionally or negligently, then those persons are held liable.
In the 2026 Global Index on Responsible AI, South Korea was ranked 37th globally out of 135 countries, 4th in Asia-Pacific, and 31st among high-income countries.
In 2018, the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities approved an R&D Strategy on Artificial Intelligence.With the formation of the second government of Pedro Sánchez in January 2020, the areas related to new technologies that, since 2018, were in the Ministry of Economy, were strengthened. Thus, in 2020 the Secretariat of State for Digitalization and Artificial Intelligence (SEDIA) was created. From this higher body, following the recommendations made by the R&D Strategy on Artificial Intelligence of 2018, the National Artificial Intelligence Strategy (2020) was developed, which already provided for actions concerning the governance of artificial intelligence and the ethical standards that should govern its use. This project was also included within the Recovery, Transformation and Resilience Plan (2021).
During 2021, the Government revealed that these ideas would be developed through a new government agency, and the General State Budget for 2022 authorized its creation and allocated five million euros for its development.
The Council of Ministers, at its meeting on 13 September 2022, began the process for the election of the AESIA headquarters. 16 Spanish provinces presented candidatures, with the Government opting for A Coruña, which proposed the La Terraza building.
On 22 August 2023, the Government approved the internal regulations of the Agency. With this, Spain became the first European country with an agency dedicated to the supervision of AI, anticipating the entry into force of the future European Regulation on Artificial Intelligence, which establishes the need for Member States to have with a supervisory authority in this matter.
The agency officially launched its operations on 19 June 2024. In April 2025, it became the reinforcing body for Spain's new law against unlabeled AI-generated content.
In February 2026, the Swedish government adopted the country's first comprehensive AI strategy, replacing a national orientation for AI that had been in place since 2018. The strategy sets the objective of placing Sweden among the ten leading AI nations globally and states, and that AI should be developed and used to advance societal benefit, sustainable development, competitiveness and innovation. It was prepared by the Ministry of Finance, with civil affairs minister Erik Slottner as responsible minister, and drew on the AI Commission's report Färdplan för Sverige (SOU 2025:12) and the national digitalisation strategy for 2025–2030.
The strategy emphasises regulatory simplification, advocating rules that are simple, predictable, technology-neutral and fit for purpose, and states that Sweden will work within the EU to ensure that AI legislation does not impede innovation. It supports the use of regulatory sandboxes as controlled testing environments under the EU Artificial Intelligence Act (Regulation (EU) 2024/1689), and identifies improved data sharing within and between public authorities as a priority. Other stated priorities include public-sector adoption of AI, standardisation, computing infrastructure, research and skills provision, and the development of language models trained on Swedish and national minority languages to support digital sovereignty. The strategy also addresses AI in security and defence, including the risk of AI-generated disinformation, proposing media and information literacy as a countermeasure.
Implementation is to proceed through agency assignments, legislative changes, collaboration forums and budget measures, accompanied by an action plan setting out measures, timeframes and responsible actors. The Agency for Digital Government (Digg) and the Swedish Post and Telecom Authority (PTS) were tasked with supporting implementation, with annual follow-up linked to the digitalisation strategy and to the OECD review process. Related measures included a proposed law on interoperability requirements for data sharing in public administration (Prop. 2025/26:244) and the establishment of a shared public-sector AI infrastructure (AI-verkstad), with foundations laid in 2026 and full build-out planned for 2030.
Switzerland currently has no specific AI legislation, but on 12 February 2025, the Federal Council announced plans to ratify the Council of Europe's AI Convention and incorporate it into Swiss law. A draft bill and implementation plan are to be prepared by the end of 2026. The approach includes sector-specific regulation, limited cross-sector rules, such as data protection, and non-binding measures such as industry agreements. The goals are to support innovation, protect fundamental rights, and build public trust in AI.
The UK supported the application and development of AI in business via the Digital Economy Strategy 2015–2018 introduced at the beginning of 2015 by Innovate UK as part of the UK Digital Strategy. In the public sector, the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport advised on data ethics and the Alan Turing Institute provided guidance on responsible design and implementation of AI systems. In terms of cyber security, in 2020 the National Cyber Security Centre has issued guidance on 'Intelligent Security Tools'. The following year, the UK published its 10-year National AI Strategy, which describes actions to assess long-term AI risks, including AGI-related catastrophic risks.
In March 2023, the UK released the white paper A pro-innovation approach to AI regulation. This white paper presents general AI principles, but leaves significant flexibility to existing regulators in how they adapt these principles to specific areas such as transport or financial markets. In November 2023, the UK hosted the first AI safety summit, with the prime minister Rishi Sunak aiming to position the UK as a leader in AI safety regulation. During the summit, the UK created an AI Safety Institute, as an evolution of the Frontier AI Taskforce led by Ian Hogarth. The institute was notably assigned the responsibility of advancing the safety evaluations of the world's most advanced AI models, also called frontier AI models.
The UK government indicated its reluctance to legislate early, arguing that it may reduce the sector's growth and that laws might be rendered obsolete by further technological progress. By 2026 however, the House of Lords has conducted a debate on the impact of artificial intelligence on human relationships and society. Archbishop of Canterbury Sarah Mullally (sitting with the Lords Spiritual) called for the Government and Parliament  "to have backbone and regulate AI. There may be some who are worried about what that means for a US trade deal. My advice to Ministers is to put the future of our society, our cohesion and our children first." The House of Lords Library also prepared a report on documented effects of AI on mental health, healthcare, creative industries, and the environmental.
Discussions on regulation of AI in the United States cover topics such as the timeliness of regulating AI, how to update regulations in the face of rapidly changing technology, the roles of state governments and courts, and the nature of the federal regulatory framework to govern and promote AI (what agency should lead and with what regulatory and governing powers).
In October 2023, the Executive Order 14110 presented federal requirements on the safety, security and trustworthiness of AI development and deployment. The order also requires individuals who develop the most capable AI systems to share any safety testing results with government agencies before releasing them to the public. It was revoked in January 2025 when Donald Trump became president.
On December 11, 2025, President Trump signed an executive order trying to preempt state AI laws. The executive order additionally directs federal agencies to develop a unified national approach to AI policy, evaluate state AI laws for potential conflicts, challenge them through legal action, and condition certain federal funding on state compliance, while exempting state laws related to child safety, data center infrastructure, and state government procurement. White House aide Will Scharf said that the executive order aims to "ensure that AI can operate within a single national framework in this country, as opposed to being subject to state level regulation that could potentially cripple the industry". Walter Donway, writing for a publication of the American Institute for Economic Research, criticized the order, saying, "The premise behind it is philosophically wrong: that a central authority can foresee the risks of an emergent technology better than the distributed knowledge of millions of actors operating within a free market. That premise was wrong when applied to railroads, radio, electricity, telephony, airlines, and nuclear power. It is even more disastrously wrong when applied to artificial intelligence."
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits discrimination by covered employers on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin and requires employers to make reasonable accommodations for an applicant or employee whose religious belief, practice, or observance conflicts with a work requirement. With artificial intelligence entering workplaces, it is speculated that religious objections to it may require accommodation. James Paul, a labor and employment litigator, stated that he expects AI-related religious accommodation cases to "mushroom".
In 2026, as Trump dismissed concerns about the risks of AI as a "hoax" and a "scam," and federal regulation was stalled, leaders in multiple states pursued regulatory agendas. In September 2026, California governor Gavin Newsom signed an executive order to accelerate two recent AI safety laws, which might include development of a 'kill switch', laws that had been endorsed by AI firms Anthropic and OpenAI.
The Department of Communications and Digital Technologies (DCDT) published the Draft South Africa National Artificial Intelligence (AI) Policy 2026 on 10 April 2026 as the first step towards regulating the safe and secure adoption of AI technologies across all public and private sectors in the country. However, the policy was withdrawn following a scandal involving the inclusion of fake, AI-hallucinated citations in its reference list.